
There is one mirror in  house.  is behind a sliding panel in the hallway upstairs. Our faction 
allows   stand in front of   on the second day of every third month, the day  mother cuts  
hair.

sit on the stool   mother stands behind  with the scissors, trimming. The strands fall on 
the floor in a dull, blond ring. 

When she finishes, she pulls  hair away from  face  twists   into a knot.  note how calm 
she looks  how focused she is. She is well-practiced in the art of losing herself.   ’t say the 
same of myself. 

 sneak a look at  reflection when she isn’t paying attention—not for the sake of vanity, but out 
of curiosity. A lot  happen  a person’s appearance in three months. In  reflection,  see a 
narrow face, wide, round eyes,  a long, thin nose— still look like a little girl, though sometime in 
the last few months  turned sixteen. The other factions celebrate birthdays, but we .  would be 
self-indulgent. 

“There,” she says when she pins the knot in place. Her eyes catch mine in the mirror.  is too late  
look away, but instead of scolding , she smiles at our reflection.  frown a little. Why doesn’t she 
reprimand  for staring at myself? 

“So today is the day,” she says. 

“Yes,”  reply. 

“Are  nervous?” 

 stare into  own eyes for a moment. Today is the day of the aptitude test that will show  
which of the five factions  belong in. And tomorrow, at the Choosing Ceremony,  will decide on a 
faction;  will decide the rest of  life;  will decide  stay with  family or abandon them. 

“No,”  say. “The tests  have  change our choices.” 

“Right.” She smiles. “Let’s go eat breakfast.” 

“Thank . For cutting  hair.” 

She kisses  cheek  slides the panel over the mirror.  think  mother could be beautiful, in a 
different world. Her body is thin beneath the gray robe. She has high cheekbones  long eyelashes, 
 when she lets her hair down at night,   hangs in waves over her shoulders. But she must hide that 
beauty in Abnegation. 

We walk together  the kitchen. On these mornings when  brother makes breakfast,   
father’s hand skims  hair as   reads the newspaper,   mother hums as she clears the table— 
  is on these mornings that  feel guiltiest for wanting  leave them. 

The bus stinks of exhaust. Every time   hits a patch of uneven pavement,   jostles  from side  
side, even though gripping the seat  keep myself still. 

My older brother, Caleb, stands in the aisle, holding a railing above his head  keep himself steady. 
We  look alike. He has  father’s dark hair  hooked nose   mother’s green eyes  
dimpled cheeks. When   was younger, that collection of features looked strange, but now   suits him. 
   wasn’t Abnegation, ’m sure the girls at school would stare at him. 

He also inherited  mother’s talent for selflessness. He gave his seat  a surly Candor man on the 
bus without a second thought. 


The Candor man wears a black suit with a white tie—Candor standard uniform. Their faction values 
honesty  sees the truth as black  white, so that is what they wear. 

The gaps between the buildings narrow  the roads are smoother as we near the heart of the city. 
The building that was once called the Sears Tower—we call   the Hub—emerges from the fog, a black 
pillar in the skyline. The bus passes under the elevated tracks.  have never been on a train, though 
they never stop running  there are tracks everywhere. Only the Dauntless ride them. 

Five years ago, volunteer construction workers from Abnegation repaved some of the roads. They 
started in the middle of the city  worked their   outward until they ran out of materials. The 
roads where  live are still cracked  patchy,   ’s not safe  drive on them. We  have a car 
anyway. 

Caleb’s expression is placid as the bus sways  jolts on the road. The gray robe falls from his arm 
as   clutches a pole for balance.   tell by the constant shift of his eyes that   is watching the 
people around  —striving  see only them   forget himself. Candor values honesty, but our 
faction, Abnegation, values selflessness. 

The bus stops in front of the school   get up, scooting past the Candor man.  grab Caleb’s arm 
as  stumble over the man’s shoes. My slacks are too long,  ’ve never been that graceful. 

The Upper Levels building is the oldest of the three schools in the city: Lower Levels, Mid-Levels, 
 Upper Levels. Like all the other buildings around  ,   is made of glass  steel. In front of   is a 
large metal sculpture that the Dauntless climb after school, daring each other  go higher  higher. 
Last year  watched one of them fall  break her leg.  was the one who ran  get the nurse. 

“Aptitude tests today,”  say. Caleb is not quite a year older than  am, so we are in the same year at 
school. 

He nods as we pass through the front doors. My muscles tighten the second we walk in. The 
atmosphere feels hungry, like every sixteen-year-old is trying  devour as much as    get of this 
last day.  is likely that we will not walk these halls again after the Choosing Ceremony—once we 
choose, our new factions will be responsible for finishing our education. 

Our classes are cut in half today, so we will attend all of them before the aptitude tests, which take 
place after lunch. My heart rate is already elevated. 

“You aren’t at all worried about what they’ll tell ?”  ask Caleb. 

We pause at the split in the hallway where   will go one  , toward Advanced Math,   will go 
the other, toward Faction History. 

He raises an eyebrow at . “Are ?” 

 could tell him ’ve been worried for weeks about what the aptitude test will tell me—Abnegation, 
Candor, Erudite, Amity, or Dauntless? 

Instead  smile  say, “Not really.” 

He smiles back. “Well...have a good day.” 

 walk toward Faction History, chewing on  lower lip. He never answered  question. 

The hallways are cramped, though the light coming through the windows creates the illusion of 
space; they are one of the only places where the factions mix, at our age. Today the crowd has a new 
kind of energy, a last day mania. 

A girl with long curly hair shouts “Hey!” next   ear, waving at a distant friend. A jacket sleeve 
smacks  on the cheek. Then an Erudite boy in a blue sweater shoves .  lose  balance  fall 
hard on the ground. 



“Out of   , Stiff,”   snaps,  continues down the hallway. 

My cheeks warm.  get up  dust myself off. A few people stopped when  fell, but none of them 
offered  help . Their eyes follow   the edge of the hallway. This sort of thing has been 
happening  others in  faction for months now—the Erudite have been releasing antagonistic 
reports about Abnegation,    has begun  affect the   we relate at school. The gray clothes, the 
plain hairstyle,  the unassuming demeanor of  faction are supposed  make   easier for   
forget myself,  easier for everyone else  forget  too. But now they make  a target. 

 pause by a window in the E Wing  wait for the Dauntless  arrive.  do this every morning. At 
exactly 7:25, the Dauntless prove their bravery by jumping from a moving train. 

My father calls the Dauntless “hellions.” They are pierced, tattooed,  black-clothed. Their 
primary purpose is  guard the fence that surrounds our city. From what,   know. 

They should perplex .  should wonder what courage—which is the virtue they most value—has 
 do with a metal ring through your nostril. Instead  eyes cling  them wherever they go. 

The train whistle blares, the sound resonating in  chest. The light fixed  the front of the train 
clicks on  off as the train hurtles past the school, squealing on iron rails. And as the last few cars 
pass, a mass exodus of young men  women in dark clothing hurl themselves from the moving cars, 
some dropping  rolling, others stumbling a few steps before regaining their balance. One of the 
boys wraps his arm around a girl’s shoulders, laughing. 

Watching them is a foolish practice.  turn away from the window  press through the crowd  
the Faction History classroom. 

The tests begin after lunch. We sit at the long tables in the cafeteria,  the test administrators call 
ten names at a time, one for each testing room.  sit next  Caleb  across from our neighbor Susan. 

Susan’s father travels throughout the city for his job, so   has a car  drives her   from 
school every day. He offered  drive  , too, but as Caleb says, we prefer  leave later  would not 
want  inconvenience him. 

Of course not. 

The test administrators are mostly Abnegation volunteers, although there is an Erudite in one of the 
testing rooms  a Dauntless in another  test those of   from Abnegation, because the rules state 
that we  ’t be tested by someone from our own faction. The rules also say that we  ’t prepare for 
the test in any  , so   know what  expect. 

My gaze drifts from Susan  the Dauntless tables across the room. They are laughing  shouting 
 playing cards. At another set of tables, the Erudite chatter over books  newspapers, in constant 
pursuit of knowledge. 

A group of Amity girls in yellow  red sit in a circle on the cafeteria floor, playing some kind of 
hand-slapping game involving a rhyming song. Every few minutes  hear a chorus of laughter from 
them as someone is eliminated  has  sit in the center of the circle. At the table next  them, 
Candor boys make wide gestures with their hands. They appear  be arguing about something, but   
must not be serious, because some of them are still smiling. 

At the Abnegation table, we sit quietly  wait. Faction customs dictate even idle behavior  
supersede individual preference.  doubt all the Erudite want  study all the time, or that every 
Candor enjoys a lively debate, but they  ’t defy the norms of their factions any more than  . 

Caleb’s name is called in the next group. He moves confidently toward the exit.   need  wish 
him luck or assure him that   shouldn’t be nervous. He knows where   belongs,  as far as  know, 
  always has. My earliest memory of him is from when we were four years old. He scolded  for 
not giving  jump rope  a little girl on the playground who didn’t have anything  play with. He 
doesn’t lecture  often anymore, but  have his look of disapproval memorized. 

 have tried  explain  him that  instincts are not the same as his—  didn’t even enter  
mind  give  seat  the Candor man on the bus—but   doesn’t understand. “Just do what you’re 
supposed ,”   always says.  is that easy for him.  should be that easy for . 

My stomach wrenches.  close  eyes  keep them closed until ten minutes later, when Caleb 
sits down again. 

He is plaster-pale. He pushes his palms along his legs like  do when  wipe off sweat,  when   
brings them back, his fingers shake.  open  mouth  ask him something, but the words  
come.  am not allowed  ask him about his results,    is not allowed  tell . 

An Abnegation volunteer speaks the next round of names. Two from Dauntless, two from Erudite, 
two from Amity, two from Candor,  then: “From Abnegation: Susan Black  Beatrice Prior.” 

 get up because ’m supposed , but if   were up  ,  would stay in  seat for the rest of 
time.  feel like there is a bubble in  chest that expands more by the second, threatening  break 
 apart from the inside.  follow Susan  the exit. The people  pass probably  ’t tell   apart. We 
wear the same clothes  we wear our blond hair the same  . The only difference is that Susan 
might not feel like she’s going  throw up,  from what   tell, her hands aren’t shaking so hard 


she has  clutch the hem of her shirt  steady them. 

Waiting for   outside the cafeteria is a row of ten rooms. They are used only for the aptitude tests, 
so  have never been in one before. Unlike the other rooms in the school, they are separated, not by 
glass, but by mirrors.  watch myself, pale  terrified, walking toward one of the doors. Susan grins 
nervously at  as she walks into room 5,   walk into room 6, where a Dauntless woman waits for 
. 

She is not as severe-looking as the young Dauntless  have seen. She has small, dark, angular eyes 
 wears a black blazer—like a man’s suit—and jeans.  is only when she turns  close the door that 
 see a tattoo on the back of her neck, a black--white hawk with a red eye.   didn’t feel like  
heart had migrated   throat,  would ask her what   signifies.  must signify something. 

Mirrors cover the inner walls of the room.   see  reflection from all angles: the gray fabric 
obscuring the shape of  back,  long neck,  knobby-knuckled hands, red with a blood blush. 
The ceiling glows white with light. In the center of the room is a reclined chair, like a dentist’s, with a 
machine next   .  looks like a place where terrible things happen. 

“Don’t worry,” the woman says, “  doesn’t hurt.” 

Her hair is black  straight, but in the light  see that   is streaked with gray. 

“Have a seat  get comfortable,” she says. “My name is Tori.” 

Clumsily  sit in the chair  recline, putting  head on the headrest. The lights hurt  eyes. 
Tori busies herself with the machine on  right.  try  focus on her  not on the wires in her 
hands. 

“Why the hawk?”  blurt out as she attaches an electrode   forehead. 

“Never met a curious Abnegation before,” she says, raising her eyebrows at . 

 shiver,  goose bumps appear on  arms. My curiosity is a mistake, a betrayal of Abnegation 
values. 

Humming a little, she presses another electrode   forehead  explains, “In some parts of the 
ancient world, the hawk symbolized the sun. Back when  got this,  figured if  always had the sun on 
,  wouldn’t be afraid of the dark.” 

 try  stop myself from asking another question, but   ’t help  . “You’re afraid of the dark?” 

“ was afraid of the dark,” she corrects . She presses the next electrode  her own forehead,  
attaches a wire   . She shrugs. “Now   reminds  of the fear ’ve overcome.” 

She stands behind .  squeeze the armrests so tightly the redness pulls away from  knuckles. 
She tugs wires toward her, attaching them  ,  her,  the machine behind her. Then she passes 
 a vial of clear liquid. 

“Drink this,” she says. 

“What is  ?” My throat feels swollen.  swallow hard. “What’s going  happen?” 

“Can’t tell  that. Just trust .” 

 press air from  lungs  tip the contents of the vial into  mouth. My eyes close. 

When they open, an instant has passed, but  am somewhere else.  stand in the school cafeteria again, 
but all the long tables are empty,   see through the glass walls that  ’s snowing. On the table in 
front of  are two baskets. n one is a hunk of cheese,  in the other, a knife the length of  
forearm. 

Behind , a woman’s voice says, “Choose.” 

“Why?”  ask. 



“Choose,” she repeats. 

 look over  shoulder, but no one is there.  turn back  the baskets. “What will  do with them?” 

“Choose!” she yells. 

When she screams at ,  fear disappears  stubbornness replaces  .  scowl  cross  
arms. 

“Have   your  ,” she says. 

The baskets disappear.  hear a door squeak  turn  see who   is.  see not a “who” but a “what”: 
A dog with a pointed nose stands a few yards away from .  crouches low  creeps toward , its 
lips peeling back from its white teeth. A growl gurgles from deep in its throat,   see why the 
cheese would have come in handy. Or the knife. But  ’s too late now. 

 think about running, but the dog will be faster than .   ’t wrestle    the ground. My head 
pounds.  have  make a decision.    jump over one of the tables  use   as a shield—no,  am 
too short  jump over the tables,  not strong enough  tip one over. 

The dog snarls,    almost feel the sound vibrating in  skull. 

My biology textbook said that dogs  smell fear because of a chemical secreted by human glands 
in a state of duress, the same chemical a dog’s prey secretes. Smelling fear leads them  attack. The 
dog inches toward , its nails scraping the floor. 

  ’t run.   ’t fight. Instead  breathe in the smell of the dog’s foul breath  try not  think 
about what   just ate. There are no whites in its eyes, just a black gleam. 

What else do  know about dogs?  shouldn’t look   in the eye. That’s a sign of aggression.  
remember asking  father for a pet dog when  was young,  now, staring at the ground in front of 
the dog’s paws,   ’t remember why.  comes closer, still growling.  staring into its eyes is a sign 
of aggression, what’s a sign of submission? 

My breaths are loud but steady.  sink   knees. The last thing  want  do is lie down on the 
ground in front of the dog—making its teeth level with  face—but  ’s the best option  have.  
stretch  legs out behind   lean on  elbows. The dog creeps closer,  closer, until  feel 
its warm breath on  face. My arms are shaking. 

 barks in  ear,   clench  teeth  keep from screaming. 

Something rough  wet touches  cheek. The dog’s growling stops,  when  lift  head  
look at   again,   is panting.  licked  face.  frown  sit on  heels. The dog props its paws up 
on  knees  licks  chin.  cringe, wiping the drool from  skin,  laugh. 

“You’re not such a vicious beast, huh?” 

 get up slowly so   startle  , but   seems like a different animal than the one that faced  a 
few seconds ago.  stretch out a hand, carefully, so   draw   back if  need . The dog nudges  
hand with its head.  am suddenly glad  didn’t pick up the knife. 

 blink,  when  eyes open, a child stands across the room wearing a white dress. She stretches 
out both hands  squeals, “Puppy!” 

As she runs toward the dog at  side,  open  mouth  warn her, but  am too late. The dog 
turns. Instead of growling,   barks  snarls  snaps,  its muscles bunch up like coiled wire. 
About  pounce.   think,  just jump;  hurl  body on top of the dog, wrapping  arms 
around its thick neck. 

My head hits the ground. The dog is gone,  so is the little girl. Instead  am alone—in the testing 
room, now empty.  turn in a slow circle   ’t see myself in any of the mirrors.  push the door 



open  walk into the hallway, but   isn’t a hallway;  ’s a bus,  all the seats are taken. 

 stand in the aisle  hold on  a pole. Sitting near  is a man with a newspaper.   ’t see his 
face over the top of the paper, but   see his hands. They are scarred, like   was burned,  they 
clench around the paper like   wants  crumple  . 

“Do  know this guy?”   asks. He taps the picture on the front page of the newspaper. The 
headline reads: “Brutal Murderer Finally Apprehended!”  stare at the word “murderer.”  has been a 
long time since  last read that word, but even its shape fills  with dread. 

In the picture beneath the headline is a young man with a plain face  a beard.  feel like  do 
know him, though   remember how. And at the same time,  feel like   would be a bad idea  
tell the man that. 

“Well?”  hear anger in his voice. “Do ?” 

A bad idea—no, a very bad idea. My heart pounds   clutch the pole  keep  hands from 
shaking, from giving  away.   tell him  know the man from the article, something awful will 
happen  . But   convince him that  .   clear  throat  shrug  shoulders—but 
that would be a lie. 

 clear  throat. 

“Do ?”   repeats. 

 shrug  shoulders. 

“Well?” 

A shudder goes through . My fear is irrational; this is just a test,   isn’t real. “Nope,”  say,  
voice casual. “No idea who   is.” 

He stands,  finally  see his face. He wears dark sunglasses  his mouth is bent into a snarl. 
His cheek is rippled with scars, like his hands. He leans close   face. His breath smells like 
cigarettes. Not real,  remind myself. Not real. 

“You’re lying,”   says. “You’re lying !” 

“ am not.” 

“  see   in your eyes.” 

 pull myself up straighter. “You  ’t.” 

“  know him,”   says in a low voice, “you could save . You could save !” 

 narrow  eyes. “Well,”  say.  set  jaw. “ .” 


 wake  sweaty palms  a pang of guilt in  chest.  am lying in the chair in the mirrored room. 
When  tilt  head back,  see Tori behind . She pinches her lips together  removes electrodes 
from our heads.  wait for her  say something about the test—that  ’s over, or that  did well, 
although how could  do poorly on a test like this?—but she says nothing, just pulls the wires from  
forehead. 

 sit forward  wipe  palms off on  slacks.  had  have done something wrong, even if   
only happened in  mind. Is that strange look on Tori’s face because she doesn’t know how  tell 
 what a terrible person  am?  wish she would just come out with  . 

“That,” she says, “was perplexing. Excuse , ’ll be right back.” 

Perplexing? 

 bring  knees   chest  bury  face in them.  wish  felt like crying, because the tears 
might bring  a sense of release, but  . How   fail a test  aren’t allowed  prepare 
for? 

As the moments pass,  get more nervous.  have  wipe off  hands every few seconds as the 
sweat collects—or maybe  just do   because   helps  feel calmer. What if they tell  that ’m not 
cut out for any faction?  would have  live on the streets, with the factionless.   ’t do that. To live 
factionless is not just  live in poverty  discomfort;   is  live divorced from society, separated 
from the most important thing in life: community. 

My mother told  once that we  ’t survive alone, but even if we could, we wouldn’t want . 
Without a faction, we have no purpose  no reason  live. 

 shake  head.   ’t think like this.  have  stay calm. 

Finally the door opens,  Tori walks back in.  grip the arms of the chair. 

“Sorry  worry ,” Tori says. She stands by  feet with her hands in her pockets. She looks 
tense  pale. 

“Beatrice, your results were inconclusive,” she says. “Typically, each stage of the simulation 
eliminates one or more of the factions, but in your case, only two have been ruled out.” 

 stare at her. “Two?”  ask. My throat is so tight  ’s hard  talk. 

“  had shown an automatic distaste for the knife  selected the cheese, the simulation would 
have led   a different scenario that confirmed your aptitude for Amity. That didn’t happen, which 
is why Amity is out.” Tori scratches the back of her neck. “Normally, the simulation progresses in a 
linear fashion, isolating one faction by ruling out the rest. The choices  made didn’t even allow 
Candor, the next possibility,  be ruled out, so  had  alter the simulation  put  on the bus. And 
there your insistence upon dishonesty ruled out Candor.” She half smiles. “Don’t worry about that. 
Only the Candor tell the truth in that one.” 

One of the knots in  chest loosens. Maybe ’m not an awful person. 

“ suppose that’s not entirely true. People who tell the truth are the Candor... the Abnegation,” 
she says. “Which gives   a problem.” 

My mouth falls open. 

“On the one hand,  threw yourself on the dog rather than let   attack the little girl, which is an 
Abnegation-oriented response.. .but on the other, when the man told  that the truth would save him, 


 still refused  tell  . Not an Abnegation-oriented response.” She sighs. “Not running from the 
dog suggests Dauntless, but so does taking the knife, which  didn’t do.” 

She clears her throat  continues. “Your intelligent response  the dog indicates strong alignment 
with the Erudite.  have no idea what  make of your indecision in stage one, but—” 

“Wait,”  interrupt her. “So  have no idea what  aptitude is?” 

“Yes  no. My conclusion,” she explains, “is that  display equal aptitude for Abnegation, 
Dauntless,  Erudite. People who get this kind of result are...” She looks over her shoulder like she 
expects someone  appear behind her. “...are called... Divergent.” She says the last word so quietly 
that  almost  hear  ,  her tense, worried look returns. She walks around the side of the chair 
 leans in close  . 

“Beatrice,” she says, “under no circumstances should  share that information with anyone. This 
is very important.” 

“We aren’t supposed  share our results.”  nod. “ know that.” 

“No.” Tori kneels next  the chair now  places her arms on the armrest. Our faces are inches 
apart. “This is different.   mean  shouldn’t share them now;  mean  should never share 
them with anyone, ever, no matter what happens. Divergence is extremely dangerous. You 
understand?” 

  understand—how could inconclusive test results be dangerous?—but  still nod.   want 
 share  test results with anyone anyway. 

“Okay.”  peel  hands from the arms of the chair  stand.  feel unsteady. 

“ suggest,” Tori says, “that  go home. You have a lot of thinking  do,  waiting with the 
others may not benefit .” 

“ have  tell  brother where ’m going.” 

“’ll let him know.” 

 touch  forehead  stare at the floor as  walk out of the room.   ’t bear  look her in the 
eye.   ’t bear  think about the Choosing Ceremony tomorrow. 

’s  choice now, no matter what the test says. 

Abnegation. Dauntless. Erudite. 

Divergent. 

 decide not  take the bus.   get home early,  father will notice when   checks the house log at 
the end of the day,  ’ll have  explain what happened. Instead  walk. ’ll have  intercept Caleb 
before   mentions anything  our parents, but Caleb  keep a secret. 

 walk in the middle of the road. The buses tend  hug the curb, so  ’s safer here. Sometimes, on 
the streets near  house,   see places where the yellow lines used  be. We have no use for them 
now that there are so few cars. We  need stoplights, either, but in some places they dangle 
precariously over the road like they might crash down any minute. 

Renovation moves slowly through the city, which is a patchwork of new, clean buildings  old, 
crumbling ones. Most of the new buildings are next  the marsh, which used  be a lake a long time 
ago. The Abnegation volunteer agency  mother works for is responsible for most of those 
renovations. 

When  look at the Abnegation lifestyle as an outsider,  think  ’s beautiful. When  watch  
family move in harmony; when we go  dinner parties  everyone cleans together afterward 
without having  be asked; when  see Caleb help strangers carry their groceries,  fall in love with 



this life all over again. ’s only when  try  live   myself that  have trouble.  never feels genuine. 

But choosing a different faction means  forsake  family. Permanently. 

Just past the Abnegation sector of the city is the stretch of building skeletons  broken sidewalks 
that  now walk through. There are places where the road has completely collapsed, revealing sewer 
systems  empty subways that  have  be careful  avoid,  places that stink so powerfully of 
sewage  trash that  have  plug  nose. 

This is where the factionless live. Because they failed  complete initiation into whatever faction 
they chose, they live in poverty, doing the work no one else wants  do. They are janitors  
construction workers  garbage collectors; they make fabric  operate trains  drive buses. In 
return for their work they get food  clothing, but, as  mother says, not enough of either. 

 see a factionless man standing on the corner up ahead. He wears ragged brown clothing  skin 
sags from his jaw. He stares at ,   stare back at him, unable  look away. 

“Excuse ,”   says. His voice is raspy. “Do  have something   eat?” 

 feel a lump in  throat. A stern voice in  head says, Duck your head  keep walking. 

No.  shake  head.  should not be afraid of this man. He needs help   am supposed  help 
him. 

“Um...yes,”  say.  reach into  bag. My father tells   keep food in  bag at all times for 
exactly this reason.  offer the man a small bag of dried apple slices. 

He reaches for them, but instead of taking the bag, his hand closes around  wrist. He smiles at 
. He has a gap between his front teeth. 

“My,   have pretty eyes,”   says. “’s a shame the rest of  is so plain.” 

My heart pounds.  tug  hand back, but his grip tightens.  smell something acrid  unpleasant 
on his breath. 

“You look a little young  be walking around by yourself, dear,”   says. 

 stop tugging,  stand up straighten  know  look young;   need  be reminded. “’m older 
than  look,”  retort. “’m sixteen.” 

His lips spread wide, revealing a gray molar with a dark pit in the side.   ’t tell if  ’s smiling or 
grimacing. “Then isn’t today a special day for ? The day before  choose ?” 

“Let go of ,”  say.  hear ringing in  ears. My voice sounds clear  stern—not what  
expected  hear.  feel like   doesn’t belong  . 

 am ready.  know what  do.  picture myself bringing  elbow back  hitting him.  see the 
bag of apples flying away from .  hear  running footsteps.  am prepared  act. 

But then   releases  wrist, takes the apples,  says, “Choose wisely, little girl.” 

 reach  street five minutes before  usually do, according   watch—which is the only 
adornment Abnegation allows,  only because  ’s practical.  has a gray band  a glass face.   
tilt   right,   almost see  reflection over the hands. 

The houses on  street are all the same size  shape. They are made of gray cement, with few 
windows, in economical, no-nonsense rectangles. Their lawns are crabgrass  their mailboxes are 
dull metal. To some the sight might be gloomy, but   their simplicity is comforting. 

The reason for the simplicity isn’t disdain for uniqueness, as the other factions have sometimes 
interpreted  . Everything—our houses, our clothes, our hairstyles—is meant  help   forget 
ourselves   protect   from vanity, greed,  envy, which are just forms of selfishness.  we 
have little,  want for little,  we are all equal, we envy no one. 

try  love  . 

sit on the front step  wait for Caleb  arrive.  doesn’t take long. After a minute see gray- 
robed forms walking down the street. hear laughter. At school we try not  draw attention  
ourselves, but once we’re home, the games  jokes start. My natural tendency toward sarcasm is 
still not appreciated. Sarcasm is always at someone’s expense. Maybe  ’s better that Abnegation 
wants   suppress  . Maybe  have  leave  family. Maybe if fight  make Abnegation 
work,  act will turn into reality. 

“Beatrice!” Caleb says. “What happened? Are  all right?” 

“  fine.” He is with Susan  her brother, Robert,  Susan is giving  a strange look, like 
am a different person than the one she knew this morning. shrug. “When the test was over, got sick. 
Must have been that liquid they gave  . feel better now, though.” 

try  smile convincingly. seem  have persuaded Susan  Robert, who no longer look 
concerned for  mental stability, but Caleb narrows his eyes at , the     does when   
suspects someone of duplicity. 

“Did  two take the bus today?” ask.  care how Susan  Robert got home from school, 
but need  change the subject. 

“Our father had  work late,” Susan says, “and   told   we should spend some time thinking 
before the ceremony tomorrow.” 

My heart pounds at the mention of the ceremony. 

“You’re welcome  come over later, if you’d like,” Caleb says politely. 

“Thank .” Susan smiles at Caleb. 

Robert raises an eyebrow at . He  have been exchanging looks for the past year as Susan  
Caleb flirt in the tentative   known only  the Abnegation. Caleb’s eyes follow Susan down the 
walk. have  grab his arm  startle him from his daze. lead him into the house  close the door 
behind  . 

He turns  . His dark, straight eyebrows draw together so that a crease appears between them. 
When   frowns,   looks more like  mother than  father. In an instant  see him living the 
same kind of life  father did: staying in Abnegation, learning a trade, marrying Susan,  having a 
family.  will be wonderful. 

may not see  . 


“Are  going  tell  the truth now?”   asks softly. 

“The truth is,” say, “  not supposed  discuss  . And you’re not supposed  ask.” 

“All those rules  bend,    ’t bend this one? Not even for something this important?” 
His eyebrows tug together,    bites the corner of his lip. Though his words are accusatory,   
sounds like   is probing  for information—like   actually wants  answer. 

narrow  eyes. “Will ? What happened in your test, Caleb?” 

Our eyes meet. hear a train horn, so faint   could easily be wind whistling through an alleyway. 
But know   when hear  .  sounds like the Dauntless, calling   them. 

“Just... tell our parents what happened, okay?” say. 

His eyes stay on mine for a few seconds,  then   nods. 

want  go upstairs  lie down. The test, the walk,   encounter with the factionless man 
exhausted . But  brother made breakfast this morning,   mother prepared our lunches,  
 father made dinner last night, so  ’s  turn  cook. breathe deeply  walk into the kitchen  
start cooking. 

A minute later, Caleb joins . grit  teeth. He helps with everything. What irritates  most 
about him is his natural goodness, his inborn selflessness. 

Caleb  work together without speaking. cook peas on the stove. He defrosts four pieces of 
chicken. Most of what we eat is frozen or canned, because farms these days are far away. My mother 
told  once that, a long time ago, there were people who wouldn’t buy genetically engineered 
produce because they viewed   as unnatural. Now we have no other option. 

By the time  parents get home, dinner is ready  the table is set. My father drops his bag at the 
door  kisses  head. Other people see him as an opinionated man—too opinionated, maybe—but 
 ’s also loving. try  see only the good in him; try. 

“How did the test go?”   asks . pour the peas into a serving bowl. 

“Fine,” say. couldn’t be Candor. lie too easily. 

“heard there was some kind of upset with one of the tests,”  mother says. Like  father, she 
works for the government, but she manages city improvement projects. She recruited volunteers  
administer the aptitude tests. Most of the time, though, she organizes workers  help the factionless 
with food  shelter  job opportunities. 

“Really?” says  father. A problem with the aptitude tests is rare. 

“ know much about  , but  friend Erin told  that something went wrong with one of the 
tests, so the results had  be reported verbally.” My mother places a napkin next  each plate on the 
table. “Apparently the student got sick  was sent home early.” My mother shrugs. “hope they’re 
all right. Did  two hear about that?” 

“No,” Caleb says. He smiles at  mother. 

My brother couldn’t be Candor either. 

We sit at the table. We always pass food  the right,  no one eats until everyone is served. My 
father extends his hands   mother   brother,  they extend their hands  him  ,  
 father gives thanks  God for food  work  friends  family. Not every Abnegation family 
is religious, but  father says we should try not  see those differences because they will only divide 
 . am not sure what  make of that. 

“So,”  mother says   father. “Tell .” 

She takes  father’s hand  moves her thumb in a small circle over his knuckles. stare at their 



joined hands. My parents love each other, but they rarely show affection like this in front of  . They 
taught   that physical contact is powerful, so have been wary of   since was young. 

“Tell  what’s bothering ,” she adds. 

stare at  plate. My mother’s acute senses sometimes surprise , but now they chide . Why 
was so focused on myself that didn’t notice his deep frown  his sagging posture? 

“had a difficult day at work,”   says. “Well, really,   was Marcus who had the difficult day. 
shouldn’t lay claim   .” 

Marcus is  father’s coworker; they are both political leaders. The city is ruled by a council of 
fifty people, composed entirely of representatives from Abnegation, because our faction is regarded as 
incorruptible, due  our commitment  selflessness. Our leaders are selected by their peers for their 
impeccable character, moral fortitude,  leadership skills. Representatives from each of the other 
factions  speak in the meetings on behalf of a particular issue, but ultimately, the decision is the 
council’s. And while the council technically makes decisions together, Marcus is particularly 
influential. 

 has been this   since the beginning of the great peace, when the factions were formed. think 
the system persists because we’re afraid of what might happen if   didn’t: war. 

“Is this about that report Jeanine Matthews released?”  mother says. Jeanine Matthews is 
Erudite’s sole representative, selected based on her IQ score. My father complains about her often. 

look up. “A report?” 

Caleb gives  a warning look. We aren’t supposed  speak at the dinner table unless our parents 
ask   a direct question,  they usually . Our listening ears are a gift  them,  father says. 
They give   their listening ears after dinner, in the family room. 

“Yes,”  father says. His eyes narrow. “Those arrogant, self-righteous—” He stops  clears his 
throat. “Sorry. But she released a report attacking Marcus’s character.” 

raise  eyebrows. 

“What did   say?” ask. 

“Beatrice,” Caleb says quietly. 

duck  head, turning  fork over  over  over until the warmth leaves  cheeks.  
like  be chastised. Especially by  brother. 

“ said,”  father says, “that Marcus’s violence  cruelty toward his son is the reason his son 
chose Dauntless instead of Abnegation.” 

Few people who are born into Abnegation choose  leave  . When they do, we remember. Two 
years ago, Marcus’s son, Tobias, left   for the Dauntless,  Marcus was devastated. Tobias was his 
only child—and his only family, since his wife died giving birth  their second child. The infant died 
minutes later. 

never met Tobias. He rarely attended community events  never joined his father at our house 
for dinner. My father often remarked that   was strange, but now   doesn’t matter. 

“Cruel? Marcus?” My mother shakes her head. “That poor man. As if   needs  be reminded of 
his loss.” 

“Of his son’s betrayal,  mean?”  father says coldly. “shouldn’t be surprised at this point. 
The Erudite have been attacking   with these reports for months. And this isn’t the end. There will be 
more, guarantee  .” 

shouldn’t speak again, but  ’t help myself. blurt out, “Why are they doing this?” 



“Why   take this opportunity  listen  your father, Beatrice?”  mother says gently.  
is phrased like a suggestion, not a command. look across the table at Caleb, who has that look of 
disapproval in his eyes. 

stare at  peas. am not sure  live this life of obligation any longer. am not good enough. 

“You know why,”  father says. “Because we have something they want. Valuing knowledge 
above all else results in a lust for power,  that leads men into dark  empty places. We should be 
thankful that we know better.” 

nod. know will not choose Erudite, even though  test results suggested that could. am  
father’s daughter. 

My parents clean up after dinner. They  even let Caleb help them, because we’re supposed  
keep  ourselves tonight instead of gathering in the family room, so we  think about our results. 

My family might be able  help  choose, if could talk about  results. But  ’t. Tori’s 
warning whispers in  memory every time  resolve  keep  mouth shut falters. 

Caleb  climb the stairs , at the top, when we divide  go  our separate bedrooms,   stops 
 with a hand on  shoulder. 

“Beatrice,”   says, looking sternly into  eyes. “We should think of our family.” There is an edge 
 his voice. “But. But we must also think of ourselves.” 

For a moment stare at him. have never seen him think of himself, never heard him insist on 
anything but selflessness. 

am so startled by his comment that just say what am supposed  say: “The tests  have  
change our choices.” 

He smiles a little. “Don’t they, though?” 

He squeezes  shoulder  walks into his bedroom. peer into his room  see an unmade bed 
 a stack of books on his desk. He closes the door. wish could tell him that we’re going through 
the same thing. wish could speak  him like want  instead of like   supposed . But the idea 
of admitting that need help is too much  bear, so turn away. 

walk into  room,  when close  door behind , realize that the decision might be 
simple.  will require a great act of selflessness  choose Abnegation, or a great act of courage  
choose Dauntless,  maybe just choosing one over the other will prove that belong. Tomorrow, 
those two qualities will struggle within ,  only one  win. 

The bus we take  get  the Choosing Ceremony is full of people in gray shirts  gray slacks. A 
pale ring of sunlight burns into the clouds like the end of a lit cigarette. will never smoke one myself 
—they are closely tied  vanity—but a crowd of Candor smokes them in front of the building when 
we get off the bus. 

have  tilt  head back  see the top of the Hub,  even then, part of   disappears into the 
clouds.  is the tallest building in the city.  see the lights on the two prongs on its roof from  
bedroom window. 

follow  parents off the bus. Caleb seems calm, but so would , if knew what was going  do. 
Instead get the distinct impression that  heart will burst out of  chest any minute now,  
grab his arm  steady myself as walk up the front steps. 

The elevator is crowded, so  father volunteers  give a cluster of Amity our place. We climb the 
stairs instead, following him unquestioningly. We set an example for our fellow faction members,  
soon the three of   are engulfed in the mass of gray fabric ascending cement stairs in the half light. 
settle into their pace. The uniform pounding of feet in  ears  the homogeneity of the people 
around  makes  believe that could choose this. could be subsumed into Abnegation’s hive 
mind, projecting always outward. 

But then  legs get sore,  struggle  breathe,  am again distracted by myself. We have 
 climb twenty flights of stairs  get  the Choosing Ceremony. 

My father holds the door open on the twentieth floor  stands like a sentry as every Abnegation 
walks past him. would wait for him, but the crowd presses  forward, out of the stairwell  into 
the room where will decide the rest of  life. 

The room is arranged in concentric circles. On the edges stand the sixteen-year-olds of every 
faction. We are not called members yet; our decisions today will make   initiates,  we will 
become members if we complete initiation. 

We arrange ourselves in alphabetical order, according  the last names we may leave behind today. 
stand between Caleb  Danielle Pohler, an Amity girl with rosy cheeks  a yellow dress. 

Rows of chairs for our families make up the next circle. They are arranged in five sections, 
according  faction. Not everyone in each faction comes  the Choosing Ceremony, but enough of 
them come that the crowd looks huge. 

The responsibility  conduct the ceremony rotates from faction  faction each year,  this year 
is Abnegation’s. Marcus will give the opening address  read the names in reverse alphabetical 
order. Caleb will choose before . 

In the last circle are five metal bowls so large they could hold  entire body, if curled up. Each 
one contains a substance that represents each faction: gray stones for Abnegation, water for Erudite, 
earth for Amity, lit coals for Dauntless,  glass for Candor. 

When Marcus calls  name, will walk  the center of the three circles. will not speak. He will 
offer  a knife. will cut into  hand  sprinkle  blood into the bowl of the faction choose. 

My blood on the stones. My blood sizzling on the coals. 

Before  parents sit down, they stand in front of Caleb  . My father kisses  forehead  
claps Caleb on the shoulder, grinning. 


“See  soon,”   says. Without a trace of doubt. 

My mother hugs ,  what little resolve have left almost breaks. clench  jaw  stare up 
at the ceiling, where globe lanterns hang  fill the room with blue light. She holds  for what feels 
like a long time, even after let  hands fall. Before she pulls away, she turns her head  whispers 
in  ear, “love . No matter what.” 

frown at her back as she walks away. She knows what might do. She must know, or she wouldn’t 
feel the need  say that. 

Caleb grabs  hand, squeezing  palm so tightly   hurts, but  let go. The last time we held 
hands was at  uncle’s funeral, as  father cried. We need each other’s strength now, just as we did 
then. 

The room slowly comes  order. should be observing the Dauntless; should be taking in as much 
information as , but  only stare at the lanterns across the room. try  lose myself in the 
blue glow. 

Marcus stands at the podium between the Erudite  the Dauntless  clears his throat into the 
microphone. “Welcome,”   says. “Welcome  the Choosing Ceremony. Welcome  the day we 
honor the democratic philosophy of our ancestors, which tells   that every man has the right  
choose his own   in this world.” 

Or,   occurs  , one of five predetermined ways. squeeze Caleb’s fingers as hard as   is 
squeezing mine. 

“Our dependents are now sixteen. They stand on the precipice of adulthood,    is now up  them 
 decide what kind of people they will be.” Marcus’s voice is solemn  gives equal weight  each 
word. “Decades ago our ancestors realized that   is not political ideology, religious belief, race, or 
nationalism that is  blame for a warring world. Rather, they determined that   was the fault of 
human personality—of humankind’s inclination toward evil, in whatever form that is. They divided 
into factions that sought  eradicate those qualities they believed responsible for the world’s 
disarray.” 

My eyes shift  the bowls in the center of the room. What do believe? do not know; do not 
know; do not know. 

“Those who blamed aggression formed Amity.” 

The Amity exchange smiles. They are dressed comfortably, in red or yellow. Every time see them, 
they seem kind, loving, free. But joining them has never been an option for . 

“Those who blamed ignorance became the Erudite.” 

Ruling out Erudite was the only part of  choice that was easy. 

“Those who blamed duplicity created Candor.” 

have never liked Candor. 

“Those who blamed selfishness made Abnegation.” 

blame selfishness; do. 

“And those who blamed cowardice were the Dauntless.” 

But am not selfless enough. Sixteen years of trying  am not enough. 

My legs go numb, like all the life has gone out of them,  wonder how will walk when  
name is called. 

“Working together, these five factions have lived in peace for many years, each contributing  a 
different sector of society. Abnegation has fulfilled our need for selfless leaders in government; 



Candor has provided   with trustworthy  sound leaders in law; Erudite has supplied   with 
intelligent teachers  researchers; Amity has given   understanding counselors  caretakers;  
Dauntless provides   with protection from threats both within  without. But the reach of each 
faction is not limited  these areas. We give one another far more than  be adequately 
summarized. In our factions, we find meaning, we find purpose, we find life.” 

think of the motto read in  Faction History textbook: Faction before blood. More than family, 
our factions are where we belong. Can that possibly be right? 

Marcus adds, “Apart from them, we would not survive.” 

The silence that follows his words is heavier than other silences.  is heavy with our worst fear, 
greater even than the fear of death:  be factionless. 

Marcus continues, “Therefore this day marks a happy occasion—the day on which we receive our 
new initiates, who will work with   toward a better society  a better world.” 

A round of applause.  sounds muffled. try  stand completely still, because if  knees are 
locked   body is stiff,  shake. Marcus reads the first names, but  ’t tell one syllable 
from the other. How will know when   calls  name? 

One by one, each sixteen-year-old steps out of line  walks  the middle of the room. The first 
girl  choose decides on Amity, the same faction from which she came. watch her blood droplets 
fall on soil,  she stands behind their seats alone. 

The room is constantly moving, a new name  a new person choosing, a new knife  a new 
choice. recognize most of them, but doubt they know . 

“James Tucker,” Marcus says. 

James Tucker of the Dauntless is the first person  stumble on his    the bowls. He throws his 
arms out  regains his balance before hitting the floor. His face turns red    walks fast  the 
middle of the room. When   stands in the center,   looks from the Dauntless bowl  the Candor 
bowl—the orange flames that rise higher each moment,  the glass reflecting blue light. 

Marcus offers him the knife. He breathes deeply—watch his chest rise—and, as   exhales, 
accepts the knife. Then   drags   across his palm with a jerk  holds his arm out  the side. His 
blood falls onto glass,    is the first of    switch factions. The first faction transfer. A mutter 
rises from the Dauntless section,  stare at the floor. 

They will see him as a traitor from now on. His Dauntless family will have the option of visiting 
him in his new faction, a week  a half from now on Visiting Day, but they won’t, because   left 
them. His absence will haunt their hallways,    will be a space they  ’t fill. And then time will 
pass,  the hole will be gone, like when an organ is removed  the body’s fluids flow into the 
space   leaves. Humans  ’t tolerate emptiness for long. 

“Caleb Prior,” says Marcus. 

Caleb squeezes  hand one last time,  as   walks away, casts a long look at  over his 
shoulder. watch his feet move  the center of the room,  his hands, steady as they accept the 
knife from Marcus, are deft as one presses the knife into the other. Then   stands with blood pooling 
in his palm,  his lip snags on his teeth. 

He breathes out. And then in. And then   holds his hand over the Erudite bowl,  his blood drips 
into the water, turning   a deeper shade of red. 

hear mutters that lift into outraged cries.  barely think straight. My brother,  selfless 
brother, a faction transfer? My brother, born for Abnegation, Erudite ? 

When close  eyes, see the stack of books on Caleb’s desk,  his shaking hands sliding along 



his legs after the aptitude test. Why didn’t realize that when   told   think of myself yesterday, 
  was also giving that advice  himself? 

scan the crowd of the Erudite—they wear smug smiles  nudge each other. The Abnegation, 
normally so placid, speak  one another in tense whispers  glare across the room at the faction that 
has become our enemy. 

“Excuse ,” says Marcus, but the crowd doesn’t hear him. He shouts, “Quiet, please!” 

The room goes silent. Except for a ringing sound. 

hear  name  a shudder propels  forward. Halfway  the bowls, am sure that will 
choose Abnegation.  see   now. watch myself grow into a woman in Abnegation robes, 
marrying Susan’s brother, Robert, volunteering on the weekends, the peace of routine, the quiet nights 
spent in front of the fireplace, the certainty that will be safe,  if not good enough, better than am 
now. 

The ringing, realize, is in  ears. 

look at Caleb, who now stands behind the Erudite. He stares back at   nods a little, like   
knows what   thinking,  agrees. My footsteps falter.  Caleb wasn’t fit for Abnegation, how  
be? But what choice do have, now that   left      the only one who remains? He left  no 
other option. 

set  jaw. will be the child that stays; have  do this for  parents. have . 

Marcus offers   knife. look into his eyes—they are dark blue, a strange color—and take  . 
He nods,  turn toward the bowls. Dauntless fire  Abnegation stones are both on  left, one in 
front of  shoulder  one behind. hold the knife in  right hand  touch the blade   
palm. Gritting  teeth, drag the blade down.  stings, but barely notice. hold both hands   
chest,   next breath shudders on the   out. 

open  eyes  thrust  arm out. My blood drips onto the carpet between the two bowls. Then, 
with a gasp  ’t contain, shift  hand forward,   blood sizzles on the coals. 

am selfish. am brave. 

train  eyes on the floor  stand behind the Dauntless-born initiates who chose  return  their 
own faction. They are all taller than am, so even when lift  head, see only black-clothed 
shoulders. When the last girl makes her choice—Amity— ’s time  leave. The Dauntless exit first. 
walk past the gray-clothed men  women who were  faction, staring determinedly at the back of 
someone’s head. 

But have  see  parents one more time. look over  shoulder at the last second before pass 
them,  immediately wish hadn’t. My father’s eyes burn into mine with a look of accusation. At 
first, when feel the heat behind  eyes, think  ’s found a    set  on fire,  punish  for 
what I’ve done, but no—  about  cry. 

Beside him,  mother is smiling. 

The people behind  press  forward, away from  family, who will be the last ones  leave. 
They may even stay  stack the chairs  clean the bowls. twist  head around  find Caleb in 
the crowd of Erudite behind . He stands among the other initiates, shaking hands with a faction 
transfer, a boy who was Candor. The easy smile   wears is an act of betrayal. My stomach wrenches 
 turn away.   ’s so easy for him, maybe   should be easy for , too. 

glance at the boy   left, who was Erudite  now looks as pale  nervous as should feel. 
spent all  time worrying about which faction would choose  never considered what would 
happen if chose Dauntless. What waits for  at Dauntless headquarters? 

The crowd of Dauntless leading   go  the stairs instead of the elevators. thought only the 
Abnegation used the stairs. 

Then everyone starts running. hear whoops  shouts  laughter all around ,  dozens of 
thundering feet moving at different rhythms.  is not a selfless act for the Dauntless  take the stairs; 
  is a wild act. 

“What the hell is going on?” the boy next   shouts. 

just shake  head  keep running. am breathless when we reach the first floor,  the 
Dauntless burst through the exit. Outside, the air is crisp  cold  the sky is orange from the 
setting sun.  reflects off the black glass of the Hub. 

The Dauntless sprawl across the street, blocking the path of a bus,  sprint  catch up  the 
back of the crowd. My confusion dissipates as run. have not run anywhere in a long time. 
Abnegation discourages anything done strictly for  own enjoyment,  that is what this is:  
lungs burning,  muscles aching, the fierce pleasure of a flat-out sprint. follow the Dauntless down 
the street  around the corner  hear a familiar sound: the train horn. 

“Oh no,” mumbles the Erudite boy. “Are we supposed  hop on that thing?” 

“Yes,” say, breathless. 

 is good that spent so much time watching the Dauntless arrive at school. The crowd spreads out 
in a long line. The train glides toward   on steel rails, its light flashing, its horn blaring. The door of 
each car is open, waiting for the Dauntless  pile in,  they do, group by group, until only the new 
initiates are left. The Dauntless-born initiates are used  doing this by now, so in a second  ’s just 
faction transfers left. 

step forward with a few others  start jogging. We run with the car for a few steps  then 
throw ourselves sideways.   not as tall or as strong as some of them, so  ’t pull myself into the 


car. cling  a handle next  the doorway,  shoulder slamming into the car. My arms shake,  
finally a Candor girl grabs   pulls  in. Gasping, thank her. 

hear a shout  look over  shoulder. A short Erudite boy with red hair pumps his arms as   
tries  catch up  the train. An Erudite girl by the door reaches out  grab the boy’s hand, straining, 
but   is too far behind. He falls  his knees next  the tracks as we sail away,  puts his head in 
his hands. 

feel uneasy. He just failed Dauntless initiation. He is factionless now.  could happen at any 
moment. 

“You all right?” the Candor girl who helped  asks briskly. She is tall, with dark brown skin  
short hair. Pretty. 

nod. 

“  Christina,” she says, offering  her hand. 

haven’t shaken a hand in a long time either. The Abnegation greeted one another by bowing heads, 
a sign of respect. take her hand, uncertainly,  shake   twice, hoping didn’t squeeze too hard or 
not hard enough. 

“Beatrice,” say. 

“Do  know where we’re going?” She has  shout over the wind, which blows harder through the 
open doors by the second. The train is picking up speed. sit down.  will be easier  keep  
balance if   low  the ground. She raises an eyebrow at . 

“A fast train means wind,” say. “Wind means falling out. Get down.” 

Christina sits next  , inching back  lean against the wall. 

“guess we’re going  Dauntless headquarters,” say, “but  know where that is.” 

“Does anyone?” She shakes her head, grinning. “’s like they just popped out of a hole in the 
ground or something.” 

Then the wind rushes through the car,  the other faction transfers, hit with bursts of air, fall on 
top of one another. watch Christina laugh without hearing her  manage a smile. 

Over  left shoulder, orange light from the setting sun reflects off the glass buildings,   
faintly see the rows of gray houses that used  be  home. 

’s Caleb’s turn  make dinner tonight. Who will take his place—my mother or  father? And 
when they clear out his room, what will they discover? imagine books jammed between the dresser 
 the wall, books under his mattress. The Erudite thirst for knowledge filling all the hidden places in 
his room. Did   always know that   would choose Erudite? And if   did, how did not notice? 

What a good actor   was. The thought makes  sick   stomach, because even though left 
them too, at least was no good at pretending. At least they all knew that wasn’t selfless. 

close  eyes  picture  mother  father sitting at the dinner table in silence. Is   a 
lingering hint of selflessness that makes  throat tighten at the thought of them, or is   selfishness, 
because know will never be their daughter again? 

“They’re jumping off!” 

lift  head. My neck aches. have been curled up with  back against the wall for at least a 
half hour, listening  the roaring wind  watching the city smear past  . sit forward. The train has 
slowed down in the past few minutes,  see that the boy who shouted is right: The Dauntless in the 
cars ahead of   are jumping out as the train passes a rooftop. The tracks are seven stories up. 

The idea of leaping out of a moving train onto a rooftop, knowing there is a gap between the edge of 



the roof  the edge of the track, makes  want  throw up. push myself up  stumble  the 
opposite side of the car, where the other faction transfers stand in a line. 

“We have  jump off too, then,” a Candor girl says. She has a large nose  crooked teeth. 

“Great,” a Candor boy replies, “because that makes perfect sense, Molly. Leap off a train onto a 
roof.” 

“This is kind of what we signed up for, Peter,” the girl points out. 

“Well,   not doing  ,” says an Amity boy behind . He has olive skin  wears a brown shirt— 
  is the only transfer from Amity. His cheeks shine with tears. 

“You’ve got ,” Christina says, “or  fail. Come on,  ’ll be all right.” 

“No,   won’t! I’d rather be factionless than dead!” The Amity boy shakes his head. He sounds 
panicky. He keeps shaking his head  staring at the rooftop, which is getting closer by the second. 

 agree with him. would rather be dead than empty, like the factionless. 

“You  ’t force him,” say, glancing at Christina. Her brown eyes are wide,  she presses her 
lips together so hard they change color. She offers  her hand. 

“Here,” she says. raise an eyebrow at her hand, about  say that  need help, but she adds, “
just... ’t do   unless someone drags .” 

take her hand  we stand at the edge of the car. As   passes the roof, count, “One... 
two... three!” 

On three we launch off the train car. A weightless moment,  then  feet slam into solid ground 
 pain prickles through  shins. The jarring landing sends  sprawling on the rooftop, gravel 
under  cheek. release Christina’s hand. She’s laughing. 

“That was fun,” she says. 

Christina will fit in with Dauntless thrill seekers. brush grains of rock from  cheek. All the 
initiates except the Amity boy made   onto the roof, with varying levels of success. The Candor girl 
with crooked teeth, Molly, holds her ankle, wincing,  Peter, the Candor boy with shiny hair, grins 
proudly—  must have landed on his feet. 

Then hear a wail. turn  head, searching for the source of the sound. A Dauntless girl stands at 
the edge of the roof, staring at the ground below, screaming. Behind her a Dauntless boy holds her at 
the waist  keep her from falling off. 

“Rita,”   says. “Rita, calm down. Rita—” 

stand  look over the edge. There is a body on the pavement below  ; a girl, her arms  legs 
bent at awkward angles, her hair spread in a fan around her head. My stomach sinks  stare at the 
railroad tracks. Not everyone made  . And even the Dauntless aren’t safe. 

Rita sinks  her knees, sobbing. turn away. The longer watch her, the more likely am  cry, 
  ’t cry in front of these people. 

tell myself, as sternly as possible, that is how things work here. We do dangerous things  
people die. People die,  we move on  the next dangerous thing. The sooner that lesson sinks in, 
the better chance have at surviving initiation. 

  no longer sure that will survive initiation. 

tell myself will count  three,  when   done, will move on. One. picture the girl’s body 
on the pavement,  a shudder goes through . Two. hear Rita’s sobs  the murmured 
reassurance of the boy behind her. Three. 

My lips pursed, walk away from Rita  the roof’s edge. 



My elbow stings. pull  sleeve up  examine  ,  hand shaking. Some of the skin is peeling 
off, but   isn’t bleeding. 

“Ooh. Scandalous! A Stiff’s flashing some skin!” 

lift  head. “Stiff” is slang for Abnegation,    the only one here. Peter points at , 
smirking. hear laughter. My cheeks heat up,  let  sleeve fall. 

“Listen up! My name is Max! am one of the leaders of your new faction!” shouts a man at the 
other end of the roof. He is older than the others, with deep creases in his dark skin  gray hair at his 
temples,    stands on the ledge like  ’s a sidewalk. Like someone didn’t just fall  her death 
from  . “Several stories below   is the members’ entrance  our compound.    ’t muster the 
will  jump off,   belong here. Our initiates have the privilege of going first.” 

“You want    jump off a ledge?” asks an Erudite girl. She is a few inches taller than am, with 
mousy brown hair  big lips. Her mouth hangs open. 

 know why   shocks her. 

“Yes,” Max says. He looks amused. 

“Is there water at the bottom or something?” 

“Who knows?” He raises his eyebrows. 

The crowd in front of the initiates splits in half, making a wide path for  . look around. No one 
looks eager  leap off the building—their eyes are everywhere but on Max. Some of them nurse 
minor wounds or brush gravel from their clothes. glance at Peter. He is picking at one of his cuticles. 
Trying  act casual. 

am proud.  will get  into trouble someday, but today   makes  brave. walk toward the 
ledge  hear snickers behind . 

Max steps aside, leaving    clear. walk up  the edge  look down. Wind whips through 
 clothes, making the fabric snap. The building   on forms one side of a square with three other 
buildings. In the center of the square is a huge hole in the concrete.  ’t see what’s at the bottom of 
 . 

This is a scare tactic. will land safely at the bottom. That knowledge is the only thing that helps 
 step onto the ledge. My teeth chatter.  ’t back down now. Not with all the people betting I’ll 
fail behind . My hands fumble along the collar of  shirt  find the button that secures   shut. 
After a few tries, undo the hooks from collar  hem,  pull   off  shoulders. 

Beneath  , wear a gray T-shirt.  is tighter than any other clothes own,  no one has ever seen 
 in   before. ball up  outer shirt  look over  shoulder, at Peter. throw the ball of fabric 
at him as hard as ,  jaw clenched.  hits him in the chest. He stares at . hear catcalls  
shouts behind . 

look at the hole again. Goose bumps rise on  pale arms,   stomach lurches.   do   
now, won’t be able  do   at all. swallow hard. 

 think. just bend  knees  jump. 

The air howls in  ears as the ground surges toward , growing  expanding, or surge toward 
the ground,  heart pounding so fast   hurts, every muscle in  body tensing as the falling 
sensation drags at  stomach. The hole surrounds   drop into darkness. 

hit something hard.  gives   beneath   cradles  body. The impact knocks the wind out 
of   wheeze, struggling  breathe again. My arms  legs sting. 

A net. There is a net at the bottom of the hole. look up at the building  laugh, half relieved  



half hysterical. My body shakes  cover  face with  hands. just jumped off a roof. 

have  stand on solid ground again. see a few hands stretching out   at the edge of the net, 
so grab the first one  reach  pull myself across. roll off,  would have fallen face-first 
onto a wood floor if   had not caught . 

“He” is the young man attached  the hand grabbed. He has a spare upper lip  a full lower lip. 
His eyes are so deep-set that his eyelashes touch the skin under his eyebrows,  they are dark blue, a 
dreaming, sleeping, waiting color. 

His hands grip  arms, but   releases  a moment after stand upright again. 

“Thank ,” say. 

We stand on a platform ten feet above the ground. Around   is an open cavern. 

“Can’t believe  ,” a voice says from behind him.  belongs  a dark-haired girl with three silver 
rings through her right eyebrow. She smirks at . “A Stiff, the first  jump? Unheard of.” 

“There’s a reason why she left them, Lauren,”   says. His voice is deep,    rumbles. “What’s 
your name?” 

“Um...”  know why hesitate. But “Beatrice” just doesn’t sound right anymore. 

“Think about  ,”   says, a faint smile curling his lips. “You  get  pick again.” 

A new place, a new name.  be remade here. 

“Tris,” say firmly. 

“Tris,” Lauren repeats, grinning. “Make the announcement, Four.” 

The boy—Four—looks over his shoulder  shouts, “First jumper—Tris!” 

A crowd materializes from the darkness as  eyes adjust. They cheer  pump their fists,  
then another person drops into the net. Her screams follow her down. Christina. Everyone laughs, but 
they follow their laughter with more cheering. 

Four sets his hand on  back  says, “Welcome  Dauntless.” 

When all the initiates stand on solid ground again, Lauren  Four lead   down a narrow tunnel. 
The walls are made of stone,  the ceiling slopes, so feel like am descending deep into the heart 
of the earth. The tunnel is lit at long intervals, so in the dark space between each dim lamp, fear that 
am lost until a shoulder bumps mine. In the circles of light am safe again. 

The Erudite boy in front of  stops abruptly,  smack into him, hitting  nose on his 
shoulder. stumble back  rub  nose as recover  senses. The whole crowd has stopped,  
our three leaders stand in front of  , arms folded. 

“This is where we divide,” Lauren says. “The Dauntless-born initiates are with . assume  
 need a tour of the place.” 

She smiles  beckons toward the Dauntless-born initiates. They break away from the group  
dissolve into the shadows. watch the last heel pass out of the light  look at those of   who are 
left. Most of the initiates were from Dauntless, so only nine people remain. Of those, am the only 
Abnegation transfer,  there are no Amity transfers. The rest are from Erudite , surprisingly, 
Candor.  must require bravery  be honest all the time. wouldn’t know. 

Four addresses   next. “Most of the time work in the control room, but for the next few weeks, 
am your instructor,”   says. “My name is Four.” 

Christina asks, “Four? Like the number?” 

“Yes,” Four says. “Is there a problem?” 

“No.” 

“Good. We’re about  go into the Pit, which  will someday learn  love. —” 

Christina snickers. “The Pit? Clever name.” 

Four walks up  Christina  leans his face close  hers. His eyes narrow,  for a second   just 
stares at her. 

“What’s your name?”   asks quietly. 

“Christina,” she squeaks. 

“Well, Christina, if wanted  put up with Candor smart-mouths, would have joined their 
faction,”   hisses. “The first lesson  will learn from  is  keep your mouth shut. Got that?” 

She nods. 

Four starts toward the shadow at the end of the tunnel. The crowd of initiates moves on in silence. 

“What a jerk,” she mumbles. 

“guess   doesn’t like  be laughed at,” reply. 

 would probably be wise  be careful around Four, realize. He seemed placid   on the 
platform, but something about that stillness makes  wary now. 

Four pushes a set of double doors open,  we walk into the place   called “the Pit.” 

“Oh,” whispers Christina. “get  .” 

“Pit” is the best word for  .  is an underground cavern so huge  ’t see the other end of   from 
where stand, at the bottom. Uneven rock walls rise several stories above  head. Built into the 
stone walls are places for food, clothing, supplies, leisure activities. Narrow paths  steps carved 
from rock connect them. There are no barriers  keep people from falling over the side. 

A slant of orange light stretches across one of the rock walls. Forming the roof of the Pit are panes 


of glass , above them, a building that lets in sunlight.  must have looked like just another city 
building when we passed   on the train. 

Blue lanterns dangle at random intervals above the stone paths, similar  the ones that lit the 
Choosing room. They grow brighter as the sunlight dies. 

People are everywhere, all dressed in black, all shouting  talking, expressive, gesturing.  
see any elderly people in the crowd. Are there any old Dauntless? Do they not last that long, or are 
they just sent away when they  ’t jump off moving trains anymore? 

A group of children run down a narrow path with no railing, so fast  heart pounds,  want  
scream at them  slow down before they get hurt. A memory of the orderly Abnegation streets 
appears in  mind: a line of people on the right passing a line of people on the left, small smiles  
inclined heads  silence. My stomach squeezes. But there is something wonderful about Dauntless 
chaos. 

“  follow ,” says Four, “I’ll show  the chasm.” 

He waves   forward. Four’s appearance seems tame from the front, by Dauntless standards, but 
when   turns around, see a tattoo peeking out from the collar of his T-shirt. He leads    the right 
side of the Pit, which is conspicuously dark. squint  see that the floor stand on now ends at an 
iron barrier. As we approach the railing, hear a roar—water, fast-moving water, crashing against 
rocks. 

look over the side. The floor drops off at a sharp angle,  several stories below   is a river. 
Gushing water strikes the wall beneath   sprays upward. To  left, the water is calmer, but  
 right,   is white, battling with rock. 

“The chasm reminds   that there is a fine line between bravery  idiocy!” Four shouts. “A 
daredevil jump off this ledge will end your life.  has happened before    will happen again. 
You’ve been warned.” 

“This is incredible,” says Christina, as we all move away from the railing. 

“Incredible is the word,” say, nodding. 

Four leads the group of initiates across the Pit toward a gaping hole in the wall. The room beyond is 
well-lit enough that  see where we’re going: a dining hall full of people  clattering silverware. 
When we walk in, the Dauntless inside stand. They applaud. They stamp their feet. They shout. The 
noise surrounds   fills . Christina smiles,  a second later, so do . 

We look for empty seats. Christina  discover a mostly empty table at the side of the room,  
find myself sitting between her  Four. In the center of the table is a platter of food  
recognize: circular pieces of meat wedged between round bread slices. pinch one between  
fingers, unsure what  make of  . 

Four nudges  with his elbow. 

“’s beef,”   says. “Put this on  .” He passes  a small bowl full of red sauce. 

“You’ve never had a hamburger before?” asks Christina, her eyes wide. 

“No,” say. “Is that what  ’s called?” 

“Stiffs eat plain food,” Four says, nodding at Christina. 

“Why?” she asks. 

shrug. “Extravagance is considered self-indulgent  unnecessary.” 

She smirks. “No wonder  left.” 

“Yeah,” say, rolling  eyes. “ was just because of the food.” 



The corner of Four’s mouth twitches. 

The doors  the cafeteria open,  a hush falls over the room. look over  shoulder. A young 
man walks in,    is quiet enough that  hear his footsteps. His face is pierced in so many places 
lose count,  his hair is long, dark,  greasy. But that isn’t what makes him look menacing.  is 
the coldness of his eyes as they sweep across the room. 

“Who’s that?” hisses Christina. 

“His name is Eric,” says Four. “He’s a Dauntless leader.” 

“Seriously? But  ’s so young.” 

Four gives her a grave look. “Age doesn’t matter here.” 

 tell she’s about  ask what want  ask: Then what does matter? But Eric’s eyes stop 
scanning the room,    starts toward a table. He starts toward our table  drops into the seat next 
 Four. He offers no greeting, so neither do we. 

“Well, aren’t  going  introduce ?”   asks, nodding  Christina  . 

Four says, “This is Tris  Christina.” 

“Ooh, a Stiff,” says Eric, smirking at . His smile pulls at the piercings in his lips, making the 
holes they occupy wider,  wince. “We’ll see how long  last.” 

mean  say something—to assure him that will last, maybe—but words fail .  
understand why, but  want Eric  look at  any longer than   already has.  want him 
 look at  ever again. 

He taps his fingers against the table. His knuckles are scabbed over, right where they would split if 
  punched something too hard. 

“What have  been doing lately, Four?”   asks. 

Four lifts a shoulder. “Nothing, really,”   says. 

Are they friends? My eyes flick between Eric  Four. Everything Eric did—sitting here, asking 
about Four—suggests that they are, but the   Four sits, tense as pulled wire, suggests they are 
something else. Rivals, maybe, but how could that be, if Eric is a leader  Four is not? 

“Max tells    keeps trying  meet with ,    show up,” Eric says. “He requested 
that find out what’s going on with .” 

Four looks at Eric for a few seconds before saying, “Tell him that am satisfied with the position 
currently hold.” 

“So   wants  give  a job.” 

The rings in Eric’s eyebrow catch the light. Maybe Eric perceives Four as a potential threat  his 
position. My father says that those who want power  get   live in terror of losing  . That’s why we 
have  give power  those who do not want  . 

“So   would seem,” Four says. 

“And  aren’t interested.” 

“haven’t been interested for two years.” 

“Well,” says Eric. “Let’s hope   gets the point, then.” 

He claps Four on the shoulder, a little too hard,  gets up. When   walks away, slouch 
immediately. had not realized that was so tense. 

“Are  two...friends?” say, unable  contain  curiosity. 

“We were in the same initiate class,”   says. “He transferred from Erudite.” 

All thoughts of being careful around Four leave . “Were  a transfer too?” 



“thought would only have trouble with the Candor asking too many questions,”   says coldly. 
“Now I’ve got Stiffs, too?” 

“ must be because you’re so approachable,” say flatly. “You know. Like a bed of nails.” 

He stares at ,   look away. He isn’t a dog, but the same rules apply. Looking away is 
submissive. Looking him in the eye is a challenge. ’s  choice. 

Heat rushes into  cheeks. What will happen when this tension breaks? 

But   just says, “Careful, Tris.” 

My stomach drops like just swallowed a stone. A Dauntless member at another table calls out 
Four’s name,  turn  Christina. She raises both eyebrows. 

“What?” ask. 

“  developing a theory.” 

“And   is?” 

She picks up her hamburger, grins,  says, “That  have a death wish.” 

After dinner, Four disappears without a word. Eric leads   down a series of hallways without telling 
  where we’re going.  know why a Dauntless leader would be responsible for a group of 
initiates, but maybe   is just for tonight. 

At the end of each hallway is a blue lamp, but between them  ’s dark,  have  be careful not  
stumble over uneven ground. Christina walks beside  in silence. No one told    be quiet, but 
none of   speak. 

Eric stops in front of a wooden door  folds his arms. We gather around him. 

“For those of  who  know,  name is Eric,”   says. “am one of five leaders of the 
Dauntless. We take the initiation process very seriously here, so volunteered  oversee most of your 
training.” 

The thought makes  nauseous. The idea that a Dauntless leader will oversee our initiation is bad 
enough, but the fact that  ’s Eric makes   seem even worse. 

“Some ground rules,”   says. “You have  be in the training room by eight o’clock every day. 
Training takes place every day from eight  six, with a break for lunch. You are free  do whatever 
 like after six. You will also get some time off between each stage of initiation.” 

The phrase “do whatever  like” sticks in  mind. At home, could never do what wanted, not 
even for an evening. had  think of other people’s needs first.  even know what like  do. 

“You are only permitted  leave the compound when accompanied by a Dauntless,” Eric adds. 
“Behind this door is the room where  will be sleeping for the next few weeks. You will notice that 
there are ten beds  only nine of . We anticipated that a higher proportion of  would make   
this far.” 

“But we started with twelve,” protests Christina. close  eyes  wait for the reprimand. She 
needs  learn  stay quiet. 

“There is always at least one transfer who doesn’t make    the compound,” says Eric, picking at 
his cuticles. He shrugs. “Anyway, in the first stage of initiation, we keep transfers  Dauntless-born 
initiates separate, but that doesn’t mean  are evaluated separately. At the end of initiation, your 
rankings will be determined in comparison with the Dauntless-born initiates. And they are better than 
 are already. So expect—” 

“Rankings?” asks the mousy-haired Erudite girl   right. “Why are we ranked?” 

Eric smiles,  in the blue light, his smile looks wicked, like   was cut into his face with a knife. 



“Your ranking serves two purposes,”   says. “The first is that   determines the order in which  
will select a job after initiation. There are only a few desirable positions available.” 

My stomach tightens. know by looking at his smile, like knew the second entered the aptitude 
test room, that something bad is about  happen. 

“The second purpose,”   says, “is that only the top ten initiates are made members.” 

Pain stabs  stomach. We all stand still as statues. And then Christina says, “What?” 

“There are eleven Dauntless-borns,  nine of ,” Eric continues. “Four initiates will be cut at 
the end of stage one. The remainder will be cut after the final test.” 

That means that even if we make   through each stage of initiation, six initiates will not be 
members. see Christina look at  from the corner of  eye, but  ’t look back at her. My eyes 
are fixed on Eric  will not move. 

My odds, as the smallest initiate, as the only Abnegation transfer, are not good. 

“What do we do if we’re cut?” Peter says. 

“You leave the Dauntless compound,” says Eric indifferently, “and live factionless.” 

The mousy-haired girl clamps her hand over her mouth  stifles a sob. remember the factionless 
man with the gray teeth, snatching the bag of apples from  hands. His dull, staring eyes. But instead 
of crying, like the Erudite girl, feel colder. Harder. 

will be a member. will. 

“But that’s...not fair!” the broad-shouldered Candor girl, Molly, says. Even though she sounds 
angry, she looks terrified. “ we had known —” 

“Are  saying that if  had known this before the Choosing Ceremony,  wouldn’t have 
chosen Dauntless?” Eric snaps. “Because if that’s the case,  should get out now.   are really 
one of  ,   won’t matter   that  might fail. And if   does,  are a coward.” 

Eric pushes the door  the dormitory open. 

“You chose  ,”   says. “Now we have  choose .” 

lie in bed  listen  nine people breathing. 

have never slept in the same room as a boy before, but here have no other option, unless want  
sleep in the hallway. Everyone else changed into the clothes the Dauntless provided for  , but sleep 
in  Abnegation clothes, which still smell like soap  fresh air, like home. 

used  have  own room. could see the front lawn from the window,  beyond  , the foggy 
skyline. am used  sleeping in silence. 

Heat swells behind  eyes as think of home,  when blink, a tear slips out. cover  mouth 
 stifle a sob. 

 ’t cry, not here. have  calm down. 

 will be all right here.  look at  reflection whenever want.  befriend Christina,  
cut  hair short,  let other people clean up their own messes. 

My hands shake  the tears come faster now, blurring  vision. 

 doesn’t matter that the next time see  parents, on Visiting Day, they will barely recognize  
—if they come at all.  doesn’t matter that ache at even a split-second memory of their faces. Even 
Caleb’s, despite how much his secrets hurt . match  inhales  the inhales of the other initiates, 
  exhales  their exhales.  doesn’t matter. 

A strangled sound interrupts the breathing, followed by a heavy sob. Bed springs squeal as a large 



body turns,  a pillow muffles the sobs, but not enough. They come from the bunk next  mine— 
they belong  a Candor boy, Al, the largest  broadest of all the initiates. He is the last person 
expected  break down. 

His feet are just inches from  head. should comfort him—should want  comfort him, 
because was raised that  . Instead feel disgust. Someone who looks so strong shouldn’t act so 
weak. Why  ’t   just keep his crying quiet like the rest of  ? 

swallow hard. 

  mother knew what was thinking, know what look she would give . The corners of her 
mouth turned down. Her eyebrows set low over her eyes—not scowling, almost tired. drag the heel 
of  hand over  cheeks. 

Al sobs again. almost feel the sound grate in  own throat. He is just inches away from me—
should touch him. 

No. put  hand down  roll onto  side, facing the wall. No one has  know that  want 
 help him.  keep that secret buried. My eyes shut  feel the pull of sleep, but every time 
come close, hear Al again. 

Maybe  problem isn’t that  ’t go home. will miss  mother  father  Caleb  
evening firelight  the clack of  mother’s knitting needles, but that is not the only reason for this 
hollow feeling in  stomach. 

My problem might be that even if did go home, wouldn’t belong there, among people who give 
without thinking  care without trying. 

The thought makes  grit  teeth. gather the pillow around  ears  block out Al’s crying, 
 fall asleep with a circle of moisture pressed   cheek. 

“The first thing  will learn today is how  shoot a gun. The second thing is how  win a fight.” 
Four presses a gun into  palm without looking at   keeps walking. “Thankfully, if  are 
here,  already know how  get on  off a moving train, so  need  teach  that.” 

shouldn’t be surprised that the Dauntless expect    hit the ground running, but anticipated 
more than six hours of rest before the running began. My body is still heavy from sleep. 

“Initiation is divided into three stages. We will measure your progress  rank  according  
your performance in each stage. The stages are not weighed equally in determining your final rank, so 
  is possible, though difficult,  drastically improve your rank over time.” 

stare at the weapon in  hand. Never in  life did expect  hold a gun, let alone fire one.  
feels dangerous  , as if just by touching  , could hurt someone. 

“We believe that preparation eradicates cowardice, which we define as the failure  act in the midst 
of fear,” says Four. “Therefore each stage of initiation is intended  prepare  in a different  . 
The first stage is primarily physical; the second, primarily emotional; the third, primarily mental.” 

“But what...” Peter yawns through his words. “What does firing a gun have  do with...bravery?” 

Four flips the gun in his hand, presses the barrel  Peter’s forehead,  clicks a bullet into place. 
Peter freezes with his lips parted, the yawn dead in his mouth. 

“Wake. Up,” Four snaps. “You are holding a loaded gun,  idiot. Act like  .” 

He lowers the gun. Once the immediate threat is gone, Peter’s green eyes harden.   surprised   
 stop himself from responding, after speaking his mind all his life in Candor, but   does, his 
cheeks red. 

“And  answer your question.. . are far less likely  soil your pants  cry for your mother if 
you’re prepared  defend yourself.” Four stops walking at the end of the row  turns on his heel. 
“This is also information  may need later in stage one. So, watch .” 

He faces the wall with the targets on  —one square of plywood with three red circles on   for each 
of  . He stands with his feet apart, holds the gun in both hands,  fires. The bang is so loud   hurts 
 ears. crane  neck  look at the target. The bullet went through the middle circle. 

turn   own target. My family would never approve of  firing a gun. They would say that 
guns are used for self-defense, if not violence,  therefore they are self-serving. 

push  family from  mind, set  feet shoulder-width apart,  delicately wrap both hands 
around the handle of the gun. ’s heavy  hard  lift away from  body, but want    be as far 
from  face as possible. squeeze the trigger, hesitantly at first  then harder, cringing away from 
the gun. The sound hurts  ears  the recoil sends  hands back, toward  nose. stumble, 
pressing  hand  the wall behind  for balance.  know where  bullet went, but know 
 ’s not near the target. 

fire again  again  again,  none of the bullets come close. 

“Statistically speaking,” the Erudite boy next  me—his name is Will—says, grinning at , “you 
should have hit the target at least once by now, even by accident.” He is blond, with shaggy hair  a 
crease between his eyebrows. 

“Is that so,” say without inflection. 

“Yeah,”   says. “think you’re actually defying nature.” 


grit  teeth  turn toward the target, resolving  at least stand still.   ’t master the first 
task they give  , how will ever make   through stage one? 

squeeze the trigger, hard,  this time   ready for the recoil.  makes  hands jump back, but 
 feet stay planted. A bullet hole appears at the edge of the target,  raise an eyebrow at Will. 

“So  see,   right. The stats  lie,”   says. 

smile a little. 

 takes  five rounds  hit the middle of the target,  when do, a rush of energy goes through 
. am awake,  eyes wide open,  hands warm. lower the gun. There is power in controlling 
something that  do so much damage—in controlling something, period. 

Maybe do belong here. 

By the time we break for lunch,  arms throb from holding up the gun   fingers are hard  
straighten. massage them on     the dining hall. Christina invites A1  sit with  . Every time 
look at him, hear his sobs again, so try not  look at him. 

move  peas around with  fork,   thoughts drift back  the aptitude tests. When Tori 
warned  that being Divergent was dangerous, felt like   was branded on  face,  if so much 
as turned the wrong  , someone would see  . So far   hasn’t been a problem, but that doesn’t make 
 feel safe. What if let  guard down  something terrible happens? 

“Oh, come on. You  remember ?” Christina asks A1 as she makes a sandwich. “We were in 
Math together just a few days ago. And am not a quiet person.” 

“slept through Math most of the time,” A1 replies. “ was first hour!” 

What if the danger doesn’t come soon—what if   strikes years from now  never see   coming? 

“Tris,” says Christina. She snaps her fingers in front of  face. “You in there?” 

“What? What is  ?” 

“asked if  remember ever taking a class with ,” she says. “mean, no offense, but probably 
wouldn’t remember if  did. All the Abnegation looked the same  . mean, they still do, but 
now you’re not one of them.” 

stare at her. As if need her  remind . 

“Sorry, am being rude?” she asks. “  used  just saying whatever is on  mind. Mom used  
say that politeness is deception in pretty packaging.” 

“think that’s why our factions  usually associate with each other,” say, with a short laugh. 
Candor  Abnegation  hate each other the   Erudite  Abnegation do, but they avoid each 
other. Candor’s real problem is with Amity. Those who seek peace above all else, they say, will 
always deceive  keep the water calm. 

“Can sit here?” says Will, tapping the table with his finger. 

“What,   want  hang out with your Erudite buddies?” says Christina. 

“They aren’t  buddies,” says Will, setting his plate down. “Just because we were in the same 
faction doesn’t mean we get along. Plus, Edward  Myra are dating,  would rather not be the 
third wheel.” 

Edward  Myra, the other Erudite transfers, sit two tables away, so close they bump elbows as 
they cut their food. Myra pauses  kiss Edward. watch them carefully. I’ve only seen a few kisses in 
 life. 

Edward turns his head  presses his lips  Myra’s. Air hisses between  teeth,  look away. 
Part of  waits for them  be scolded. Another part wonders, with a touch of desperation, what   



would feel like  have someone’s lips against mine. 

“Do they have  be so public ?” say. 

“She just kissed him.” A1 frowns at . When   frowns, his thick eyebrows touch his eyelashes. 
“’s not like they’re stripping naked.” 

“A kiss is not something  do in public.” 

Al, Will,  Christina all give  the same knowing smile. 

“What?” say. 

“Your Abnegation is showing,” says Christina. “The rest of   are all right with a little affection in 
public.” 

“Oh.” shrug. “Well...guess I’ll have  get over  , then.” 

“Or   stay frigid,” says Will, his green eyes glinting with mischief. “You know.   want.” 

Christina throws a roll at him. He catches    bites  . 

“Don’t be mean  her,” she says. “Frigidity is in her nature. Sort of like being a know- -all is in 
yours.” 

“am not frigid !” exclaim. 

“Don’t worry about  ,” says Will. “’s endearing. Look, you’re all red.” 

The comment only makes  face hotter. Everyone else chuckles. force a laugh , after a few 
seconds,   comes naturally. 

 feels good  laugh again. 

After lunch, Four leads    a new room. ’s huge, with a wood floor that is cracked  creaky  
has a large circle painted in the middle. On the left wall is a green board—a chalkboard. My Lower 
Levels teacher used one, but haven’t seen one since then. Maybe   has something  do with 
Dauntless priorities: training comes first, technology comes second. 

Our names are written on the board in alphabetical order. Hanging at three-foot intervals along one 
end of the room are faded black punching bags. 

We line up behind them  Four stands in the middle, where we  all see him. 

“As said this morning,” says Four, “next  will learn how  fight. The purpose of this is  
prepare   act;  prepare your body  respond  threats  challenges—which  will need, if 
 intend  survive life as a Dauntless.” 

 ’t even think of life as a Dauntless. All  think about is making   through initiation. 

“We will go over technique today,  tomorrow  will start  fight each other,” says Four. “So 
recommend that  pay attention. Those who  learn fast will get hurt.” 

Four names a few different punches, demonstrating each one as   does, first against the air  
then against the punching bag. 

catch on as we practice. Like with the gun, need a few tries  figure out how  hold myself  
how  move  body  make   look like his. The kicks are more difficult, though   only teaches   
the basics. The punching bag stings  hands  feet, turning  skin red,  barely moves no 
matter how hard hit  . All around  is the sound of skin hitting tough fabric. 

Four wanders through the crowd of initiates, watching   as we go through the movements again. 
When   stops in front of ,  insides twist like someone’s stirring them with a fork. He stares at 
, his eyes following  body from  head   feet, not lingering anywhere—a practical, 
scientific gaze. 



“You  have much muscle,”   says, “which means you’re better off using your knees  
elbows. You  put more power behind them.” 

Suddenly   presses a hand   stomach. His fingers are so long that, though the heel of his hand 
touches one side of  rib cage, his fingertips still touch the other side. My heart pounds so hard  
chest hurts,  stare at him, wide-eyed. 

“Never forget  keep tension here,”   says in a quiet voice. 

Four lifts his hand  keeps walking. feel the pressure of his palm even after  ’s gone. ’s 
strange, but have  stop  breathe for a few seconds before  keep practicing again. 

When Four dismisses   for dinner, Christina nudges  with her elbow. 

“  surprised   didn’t break  in half,” she says. She wrinkles her nose. “He scares the hell out 
of . ’s that quiet voice   uses.” 

“Yeah. He’s...” look over  shoulder at him. He is quiet,  remarkably self-possessed. But 
wasn’t afraid that   would hurt . “...definitely intimidating,” finally say. 

Al, who was in front of  , turns around once we reach the Pit  announces, “want  get a 
tattoo.” 

From behind  , Will asks, “A tattoo of what?” 

“ know.” Al laughs. “just want  feel like I’ve actually left the old faction. Stop crying 
about  .” When we  respond,   adds, “know you’ve heard .” 

“Yeah, learn  quiet down, will ?” Christina pokes Al’s thick arm. “think you’re right. We’re 
half in, half out right now.  we want all the   in, we should look the part.” 

She gives  a look. 

“No. will not cut  hair,” say, “or dye   a strange color. Or pierce  face.” 

“How about your bellybutton?” she says. 

“Or your nipple?” Will says with a snort. 

groan. 

Now that training is done for the day, we  do whatever we want until  ’s time  sleep. The idea 
makes  feel almost giddy, although that might be from fatigue. 

The Pit is swarming with people. Christina announces that she  will meet Al  Will at the 
tattoo parlor  drags  toward the clothing place. We stumble up the path, climbing higher above 
the Pit floor, scattering stones with our shoes. 

“What is wrong with  clothes?” say. “  not wearing gray anymore.” 

“They’re ugly  gigantic.” She sighs. “Will  just let  help ?    like what put 
 in,  never have  wear   again, promise.” 

Ten minutes later stand in front of a mirror in the clothing place wearing a knee-length black 
dress. The skirt isn’t full, but   isn’t stuck   thighs, either—unlike the first one she picked out, 
which refused. Goose bumps appear on  bare arms. She slips the tie from  hair  shake   
out of its braid so   hangs wavy over  shoulders. 

Then she holds up a black pencil. 

“Eyeliner,” she says. 

“You aren’t going  be able  make  pretty,  know.” close  eyes  hold still. She runs 
the tip of the pencil along the line of  eyelashes. imagine standing before  family in these 
clothes,   stomach twists like might be sick. 

“Who cares about pretty?   going for noticeable.” 



open  eyes  for the first time stare openly at  own reflection. My heart rate picks up as 
do, like am breaking the rules  will be scolded for  .  will be difficult  break the habits of 
thinking Abnegation instilled in , like tugging a single thread from a complex work of embroidery. 
But will find new habits, new thoughts, new rules. will become something else. 

My eyes were blue before, but a dull, grayish blue—the eyeliner makes them piercing. With  
hair framing  face,  features look softer  fuller. am not pretty—my eyes are too big   
nose is too long—but  see that Christina is right. My face is noticeable. 

Looking at myself now isn’t like seeing myself for the first time;  ’s like seeing someone else for 
the first time. Beatrice was a girl saw in stolen moments at the mirror, who kept quiet at the dinner 
table. This is someone whose eyes claim mine   release ; this is Tris. 

“See?” she says. “You’re...striking.” 

Under the circumstances,  ’s the best compliment she could have given . smile at her in the 
mirror. 

“You like  ?” she says. 

“Yeah.” nod. “look like...a different person.” 

She laughs. “That a good thing or a bad thing?” 

look at myself head-on again. For the first time, the idea of leaving  Abnegation identity behind 
doesn’t make  nervous;   gives  hope. 

“A good thing.” shake  head. “Sorry, I’ve just never been allowed  stare at  reflection for 
this long.” 

“Really?” Christina shakes her head. “Abnegation is a strange faction, have  tell .” 

“Let’s go watch A1 get tattooed,” say. Despite the fact that have left  old faction behind, 
 want  criticize   yet. 

At home,  mother  picked up nearly identical stacks of clothing every six months or so. ’s 
easy  allocate resources when everyone gets the same thing, but everything is more varied at the 
Dauntless compound. Every Dauntless gets a certain amount of points  spend per month,  the 
dress costs one of them. 

Christina  race down the narrow path  the tattoo place. When we get there, A1 is sitting in the 
chair already,  a small, narrow man with more ink than bare skin is drawing a spider on his arm. 

Will  Christina flip through books of pictures, elbowing each other when they find a good one. 
When they sit next  each other, notice how opposite they are, Christina dark  lean, Will pale 
 solid, but alike in their easy smiles. 

wander around the room, looking at the artwork on the walls. These days, the only artists are in 
Amity. Abnegation sees art as impractical,  its appreciation as time that could be spent serving 
others, so though have seen works of art in textbooks, have never been in a decorated room before. 
 makes the air feel close  warm,  could get lost here for hours without noticing. skim the 
wall with  fingertips. A picture of a hawk on one wall reminds  of Tori’s tattoo. Beneath   is a 
sketch of a bird in flight. 

“’s a raven,” a voice behind  says. “Pretty, right?” 

turn  see Tori standing there. feel like am back in the aptitude test room, with the mirrors all 
around   the wires connected   forehead. didn’t expect  see her again. 

“Well, hello there.” She smiles. “Never thought would see  again. Beatrice, is  ?” 

“Tris, actually,” say. “Do  work here?” 



“do. just took a break  administer the tests. Most of the time   here.” She taps her chin. “
recognize that name. You were the first jumper, weren’t ?” 

“Yes, was.” 

“Well done.” 

“Thanks.” touch the sketch of the bird. “Listen—need  talk   about...” glance over at 
Will  Christina.  ’t corner Tori now; they’ll ask questions, “...something. Sometime.” 

“am not sure that would be wise,” she says quietly. “helped  as much as could,  now  
will have  go   alone.” 

purse  lips. She has answers; know she does.  she won’t give them   now, will have  
find a    make her tell  some other time. 

“Want a tattoo?” she says. 

The bird sketch holds  attention. never intended  get pierced or tattooed when came here. 
know that if do,   will place another wedge between    family that  never remove. And 
if  life here continues as   has been,   may soon be the least of the wedges between  . 

But understand now what Tori said about her tattoo representing a fear she overcame—a reminder 
of where she was, as well as a reminder of where she is now. Maybe there is a    honor  old 
life as embrace  new one. 

“Yes,” say. “Three of these flying birds.” 

touch  collarbone, marking the path of their flight—toward  heart. One for each member of 
the family left behind. 

^Since there are an odd number of , one of  won’t be fighting today,” says Four, stepping 
away from the board in the training room. He gives  a look. The space next   name is blank. 

The knot in  stomach unravels. A reprieve. 

“This isn’t good,” says Christina, nudging  with her elbow. Her elbow prods one of  sore 
muscles—have more sore muscles than not-sore muscles, this morning—and wince. 

“Ow.” 

“Sorry,” she says. “But look.   up against the Tank.” 

Christina  sat together at breakfast,  earlier she shielded  from the rest of the dormitory 
as changed. haven’t had a friend like her before. Susan was better friends with Caleb than with , 
 Robert only went where Susan went. 

guess haven’t really had a friend, period. ’s impossible  have real friendship when no one 
feels like they  accept help or even talk about themselves. That won’t happen here. already know 
more about Christina than ever knew about Susan,   ’s only been two days. 

“The Tank?” find Christina’s name on the board. Written next    is “Molly.” 

“Yeah, Peter’s slightly more feminine-looking minion,” she says, nodding toward the cluster of 
people on the other side of the room. Molly is tall like Christina, but that’s where the similarities end. 
She has broad shoulders, bronze skin,  a bulbous nose. 

“Those three”—Christina points at Peter, Drew,  Molly in turn—“have been inseparable since 
they crawled out of the womb, practically. hate them.” 

Will  A1 stand across from each other in the arena. They put their hands up by their faces  
protect themselves, as Four taught  ,  shuffle in a circle around each other. A1 is half a foot taller 
than Will,  twice as broad. As stare at him, realize that even his facial features are big—big 
nose, big lips, big eyes. This fight won’t last long. 

glance at Peter  his friends. Drew is shorter than both Peter  Molly, but  ’s built like a 
boulder,  his shoulders are always hunched. His hair is orange-red, the color of an old carrot. 

“What’s wrong with them?” say. 

“Peter is pure evil. When we were kids,   would pick fights with people from other factions  
then, when an adult came  break   up,  ’d cry  make up some story about how the other kid 
started  . And of course, they believed him, because we were Candor  we couldn’t lie. Ha ha.” 

Christina wrinkles her nose  adds, “Drew is just his sidekick. doubt   has an independent 
thought in his brain. And Molly...she’s the kind of person who fries ants with a magnifying glass just 
 watch them flail around.” 

In the arena, A1 punches Will hard in the jaw. wince. Across the room, Eric smirks at Al,  turns 
one of the rings in his eyebrow. 

Will stumbles  the side, one hand pressed  his face,  blocks Al’s next punch with his free 
hand. Judging by his grimace, blocking the punch is as painful as a blow would have been. Al is slow, 
but powerful. 

Peter, Drew,  Molly cast furtive looks in our direction  then pull their heads together, 
whispering. 

“think they know we’re talking about them,” say. 


“So? They already know hate them.” 

“They do? How?” 

Christina fakes a smile at them  waves. look down,  cheeks warm. shouldn’t be gossiping 
anyway. Gossiping is self-indulgent. 

Will hooks a foot around one of Al’s legs  yanks back, knocking A1  the ground. A1 scrambles 
 his feet. 

“Because I’ve told them,” she says, through the gritted teeth of her smile. Her teeth are straight on 
top  crooked on the bottom. She looks at . “We try  be pretty honest about our feelings in 
Candor. Plenty of people have told  that they  like . And plenty of people haven’t. Who 
cares?” 

“We just...weren’t supposed  hurt people,” say. 

“like  think   helping them by hating them,” she says. “  reminding them that they aren’t 
God’s gift  humankind.” 

laugh a little at that  focus on the arena again. Will  A1 face each other for a few more 
seconds, more hesitant than they were before. Will flicks his pale hair from his eyes. They glance at 
Four like they’re waiting for him  call the fight off, but   stands with his arms folded, giving no 
response. A few feet away from him, Eric checks his watch. 

After a few seconds of circling, Eric shouts, “Do  think this is a leisure activity? Should we 
break for nap-time? Fight each other!” 

“But...” A1 straightens, letting his hands down,  says, “Is   scored or something? When does the 
fight end?” 

“ ends when one of  is unable  continue,” says Eric. 

“According  Dauntless rules,” Four says, “one of  could also concede.” 

Eric narrows his eyes at Four. “According  the old rules,”   says. “In the new rules, no one 
concedes.” 

“A brave man acknowledges the strength of others,” Four replies. 

“A brave man never surrenders.” 

Four  Eric stare at each other for a few seconds. feel like am looking at two different kinds of 
Dauntless—the honorable kind,  the ruthless kind. But even know that in this room,  ’s Eric, the 
youngest leader of the Dauntless, who has the authority. 

Beads of sweat dot Al’s forehead;   wipes them with the back of his hand. 

“This is ridiculous,” A1 says, shaking his head. “What’s the point of beating him up? We’re in the 
same faction!” 

“Oh,  think  ’s going  be that easy?” Will asks, grinning. “Go on. Try  hit , slowpoke.” 

Will puts his hands up again. see determination in Will’s eyes that wasn’t there before. Does   
really believe    win? One hard shot  the head  A1 will knock him out cold. 

That is, if    actually hit Will. A1 tries a punch,  Will ducks, the back of his neck shining 
with sweat. He dodges another punch, slipping around A1  kicking him hard in the back. A1 lurches 
forward  turns. 

When was younger, read a book about grizzly bears. There was a picture of one standing on its 
hind legs with its paws outstretched, roaring. That is how A1 looks now. He charges at Will, grabbing 
his arm so    ’t slip away,  punches him hard in the jaw. 

watch the light leave Will’s eyes, which are pale green, like celery. They roll back into his head, 



 all the tension falls from his body. He slips from ATs grasp, dead weight,  crumples  the 
floor. Cold rushes down  back  fills  chest. 

ATs eyes widen,    crouches next  Will, tapping his cheek with one hand. The room falls 
silent as we wait for Will  respond. For a few seconds,   doesn’t, just lies on the ground with an 
arm bent beneath him. Then   blinks, clearly dazed. 

“Get him up,” Eric says. He stares with greedy eyes at Will’s fallen body, like the sight is a meal 
   hasn’t eaten in weeks. The curl of his lip is cruel. 

Four turns  the chalkboard  circles Al’s name. Victory. 

“Next up—Molly  Christina!” shouts Eric. A1 pulls Will’s arm across his shoulders  drags 
him out of the arena. 

Christina cracks her knuckles. would wish her luck, but  know what good that would do. 
Christina isn’t weak, but she’s much narrower than Molly. Hopefully her height will help her. 

Across the room, Four supports Will from the waist  leads him out. A1 stands for a moment by 
the door, watching them go. 

Four leaving makes  nervous. Leaving   with Eric is like hiring a babysitter who spends his 
time sharpening knives. 

Christina tucks her hair behind her ears.  is chin-length, black,  pinned back with silver clips. 
She cracks another knuckle. She looks nervous,  no wonder—who wouldn’t be nervous after 
watching Will collapse like a rag doll? 

 conflict in Dauntless ends with only one person standing, am unsure of what this part of 
initiation will do  . Will be Al, standing over a man’s body, knowing   the one who put him 
on the ground, or will be Will, lying in a helpless heap? And is   selfish of   crave victory, or is 
  brave? wipe  sweaty palms on  pants. 

snap  attention when Christina kicks Molly in the side. Molly gasps  grits her teeth like she’s 
about  growl through them. A lock of stringy black hair falls across her face, but she doesn’t brush   
away. 

Al stands next  , but   too focused on the new fight  look at him, or congratulate him on 
winning, assuming that’s what   wants. am not sure. 

Molly smirks at Christina,  without warning, dives, hands outstretched, at Christina’s 
midsection. She hits her hard, knocking her down,  pins her  the ground. Christina thrashes, but 
Molly is heavy  doesn’t budge. 

She punches,  Christina moves her head out of the  , but Molly just punches again,  again, 
until her fist hits Christina’s jaw, her nose, her mouth. Without thinking, grab Al’s arm  squeeze 
  as tightly as . just need something  hold on . Blood runs down the side of Christina’s face 
 splatters on the ground next  her cheek. This is the first time have ever prayed for someone  
fall unconscious. 

But she doesn’t. Christina screams  drags one of her arms free. She punches Molly in the ear, 
knocking her off-balance,  wriggles free. She comes  her knees, holding her face with one hand. 
The blood streaming from her nose is thick  dark  covers her fingers in seconds. She screams 
again  crawls away from Molly.  tell by the heaving of her shoulders that she’s sobbing, but 
 barely hear her over the throbbing in  ears. 

Please go unconscious. 

Molly kicks Christina’s side, sending her sprawling on her back. Al frees his hand  pulls  
tight  his side. clench  teeth  keep from crying out. had no sympathy for Al the first night, 



but am not cruel yet; the sight of Christina clutching her rib cage makes  want  stand between 
her  Molly. 

“Stop!” wails Christina as Molly pulls her foot back  kick again. She holds out a hand. “Stop! 
 ...” She coughs. “  done.” 

Molly smiles,  sigh with relief. A1 sighs too, his rib cage lifting  falling against  
shoulder. 

Eric walks toward the center of the arena, his movements slow,  stands over Christina with his 
arms folded. He says quietly, “  sorry, what did  say? You’re done?” 

Christina pushes herself  her knees. When she takes her hand from the ground,   leaves a red 
handprint behind. She pinches her nose  stop the bleeding  nods. 

“Get up,”   says.    had yelled, might not have felt like everything inside  stomach was 
about  come out of  .    had yelled, would have known that the yelling was the worst   planned 
 do. But his voice is quiet  his words precise. He grabs Christina’s arm, yanks her  her feet,  
drags her out the door. 

“Follow ,”   says  the rest of  . 

And we do. 

feel the roar of the river in  chest. 

We stand near the railing. The Pit is almost empty;   is the middle of the afternoon, though   feels 
like  ’s been night for days. 

 there were people around, doubt any of them would help Christina. We are with Eric, for one 
thing,  for another, the Dauntless have different rules—rules that brutality does not violate. 

Eric shoves Christina against the railing. 

“Climb over  ,”   says. 

“What?” She says   like she expects him  relent, but her wide eyes  ashen face suggest 
otherwise. Eric will not back down. 

“Climb over the railing,” says Eric again, pronouncing each word slowly. “   hang over the 
chasm for five minutes, will forget your cowardice.    ’t, will not allow   continue 
initiation.” 

The railing is narrow  made of metal. The spray from the river coats  , making   slippery  
cold. Even if Christina is brave enough  hang from the railing for five minutes, she may not be able 
 hold on. Either she decides  be factionless, or she risks death. 

When close  eyes, imagine her falling onto the jagged rocks below  shudder. 

“Fine,” she says, her voice shaking. 

She is tall enough  swing her leg over the railing. Her foot shakes. She puts her toe on the ledge as 
she lifts her other leg over. Facing  , she wipes her hands on her pants  holds on  the railing so 
hard her knuckles turn white. Then she takes one foot off the ledge. And the other. see her face 
between the bars of the barrier, determined, her lips pressed together. 

Next  , A1 sets his watch. 

For the first minute  a half, Christina is fine. Her hands stay firm around the railing  her arms 
 shake. start  think she might make    show Eric how foolish   was  doubt her. 

But then the river hits the wall,  white water sprays against Christina’s back. Her face strikes the 
barrier,  she cries out. Her hands slip so she’s just holding on by her fingertips. She tries  get a 
better grip, but now her hands are wet. 



 help her, Eric would make  fate the same as hers. Will let her fall  her death, or will 
resign myself  being factionless? What’s worse:  be idle while someone dies, or  be exiled  
empty-handed? 

My parents would have no problem answering that question. 

But am not  parents. 

As far as know, Christina hasn’t cried since we got here, but now her face crumples  she lets 
out a sob that is louder than the river. Another wave hits the wall  the spray coats her body. One of 
the droplets hits  cheek. Her hands slip again,  this time, one of them falls from the railing, so 
she’s hanging by four fingertips. 

“Come on, Christina,” says Al, his low voice surprisingly loud. She looks at him. He claps. “Come 
on, grab   again. You  do  . Grab  .” 

Would even be strong enough  hold on  her? Would   be worth  effort  try  help her if 
know   too weak  do any good? 

know what those questions are: excuses. Human reason  excuse any evil; that is why  ’s so 
important that we  rely on  . My father’s words. 

Christina swings her arm, fumbling for the railing. No one else cheers her on, but Al brings his big 
hands together  shouts, his eyes holding hers. wish could; wish could move, but just stare at 
her  wonder how long have been this disgustingly selfish. 

stare at Al’s watch. Four minutes have passed. He elbows  hard in the shoulder. 

“Come on,” say. My voice is a whisper. clear  throat. “One minute left,” say, louder this 
time. Christina’s other hand finds the railing again. Her arms shake so hard wonder if the earth is 
quaking beneath , jiggling  vision,  just didn’t notice. 

“Come on, Christina,” Al  say,  as our voices join, believe might be strong enough  
help her. 

will help her.  she slips again, will. 

Another wave of water splashes against Christina’s back,  she shrieks as both her hands slip off 
the railing. A scream launches from  mouth.  sounds like   belongs  someone else. 

But she doesn’t fall. She grabs the bars of the barrier. Her fingers slide down the metal until  ’t 
see her head anymore; they are all see. 

Al’s watch reads 5:00. 

“Five minutes are up,”   says, almost spitting the words at Eric. 

Eric checks his own watch. Taking his time, tilting his wrist, all while  stomach twists  
 ’t breathe. When blink, see Rita’s sister on the pavement below the train tracks, limbs bent at 
strange angles; see Rita screaming  sobbing; see myself turning away. 

“Fine,” Eric says. “You  come up, Christina.” 

Al walks toward the railing. 

“No,” Eric says. “She has  do   on her own.” 

“No, she doesn’t,” Al growls. “She did what  said. She’s not a coward. She did what  said.” 

Eric doesn’t respond. Al reaches over the railing,   ’s so tall that    reach Christina’s wrist. 
She grabs his forearm. Al pulls her up, his face red with frustration,  run forward  help.   too 
short  do much good, as suspected, but grip Christina under the shoulder once she’s high enough, 
 Al  haul her over the barrier. She drops  the ground, her face still blood-smeared from the 
fight, her back soaking wet, her body quivering. 



kneel next  her. Her eyes lift  mine, then shift  Al,  we all catch our breath together. 

That night  dream that Christina hangs from the railing again, by her toes this time,  someone 
shouts that only someone who is Divergent  help her. So run forward  pull her up, but someone 
shoves  over the edge,  wake before hit the rocks. 

Sweat-soaked  shaky from the dream, walk  the girls’ bathroom  shower  change. When 
come back, the word “Stiff” is spray-painted across  mattress in red. The word is written smaller 
along the bed frame,  again on  pillow. look around,  heart pounding with anger. 

Peter stands behind , whistling as   fluffs his pillow. ’s hard  believe could hate someone 
who looks so kind—his eyebrows turn upward naturally,    has a wide, white smile. 

“Nice decorations,”   says. 

“Did do something   that   unaware of?” demand. grab the corner of a sheet  yank   
away from the mattress. “ know if you’ve noticed, but we are in the same faction now.” 

“ know what you’re referring ,”   says lightly. Then   glances at . “And   will 
never be in the same faction.” 

shake  head as remove  pillowcase from the pillow. Don’t get angry. He wants  get a rise 
out of ;   won’t. But every time   fluffs his pillow, think about punching him in the gut. 

A1 walks in,   even have  ask him  help ;   just walks over  strips bedding with 
. will have  scrub the bed frame later. A1 carries the stack of sheets  the trash   together 
we walk toward the training room. 

“Ignore him,” A1 says. “He’s an idiot,  if   get angry,  ’ll stop eventually.” 

“Yeah.” touch  cheeks. They are still warm with an angry blush. try  distract myself. “Did 
 talk  Will?” ask quietly. “After.. . know.” 

“Yeah. He’s fine. He isn’t angry.” A1 sighs. “Now I’ll always be remembered as the first guy who 
knocked someone out cold.” 

“There are worse ways  be remembered. At least they won’t antagonize .” 

“There are better ways too.” He nudges  with his elbow, smiling. “First jumper.” 

Maybe was the first jumper, but suspect that’s where  Dauntless fame begins  ends. 

clear  throat. “One of  had  get knocked out,  know.    hadn’t been him,   would 
have been .” 

“Still,  want  do   again.” A1 shakes his head, too many times, too fast. He sniffs. “really 
.” 

We reach the door  the training room  say, “But  have .” 

He has a kind face. Maybe   is too kind for Dauntless. 

look at the chalkboard when walk in. didn’t have  fight yesterday, but today definitely will. 
When see  name, stop in the middle of the step. 

My opponent is Peter. 

“Oh no,” says Christina, who shuffles in behind  . Her face is bruised,  she looks like she is 
trying not  limp. When she sees the board, she crumples the muffin wrapper she is holding into her 
fist. “Are they serious? They’re really going  make  fight him?” 

Peter is almost a foot taller than am,  yesterday,   beat Drew in less than five minutes. Today 
Drew’s face is more black--blue than flesh-toned. 


“Maybe   just take a few hits  pretend  go unconscious,” suggests Al. “No one would 
blame .” 

“Yeah,” say. “Maybe.” 

stare at  name on the board. My cheeks feel hot. Al  Christina are just trying  help, but the 
fact that they  believe, not even in a tiny corner of their minds, that have a chance against Peter 
bothers . 

stand at the side of the room, half listening  Al  Christina’s chatter,  watch Molly fight 
Edward. He’s much faster than she is, so   sure Molly will not win today. 

As the fight goes on   irritation fades, start  get nervous. Four told   yesterday  exploit 
our opponent’s weaknesses,  aside from his utter lack of likable qualities, Peter doesn’t have any. 
He’s tall enough  be strong but not so big that  ’s slow;   has an eye for other people’s soft spots; 
 ’s vicious  won’t show  any mercy. would like  say that   underestimates , but that 
would be a lie. am as unskilled as   suspects. 

Maybe Al is right,  should just take a few hits  pretend  be unconscious. 

But  ’t afford not  try.  ’t be ranked last. 

By the time Molly peels herself off the ground, looking only half-conscious thanks  Edward,  
heart is pounding so hard  feel   in  fingertips.  ’t remember how  stand.  ’t 
remember how  punch. walk  the center of the arena   guts writhe as Peter comes toward 
, taller than remembered, arm muscles standing at attention. He smiles at . wonder if 
throwing up on him will do  any good. 

doubt  . 

“You okay there, Stiff?”   says. “You look like you’re about  cry. might go easy on  if  
cry.” 

Over Peter’s shoulder, see Four standing by the door with his arms folded. His mouth is puckered, 
like   just swallowed something sour. Next  him is Eric, who taps his foot faster than  heartbeat. 

One second Peter  are standing there, staring at each other,  the next Peter’s hands are up by 
his face, his elbows bent. His knees are bent too, like  ’s ready  spring. 

“Come on, Stiff,”   says, his eyes glinting. “Just one little tear. Maybe some begging.” 

The thought of begging Peter for mercy makes  taste bile,  on an impulse, kick him in the 
side. Or would have kicked him in the side, if   hadn’t caught  foot  yanked   forward, 
knocking  off-balance. My back smacks into the floor,  pull  foot free, scrambling   
feet. 

have  stay on  feet so    ’t kick  in the head. That’s the only thing  think about. 

“Stop playing with her,” snaps Eric. “ have all day.” 

Peter’s mischievous look disappears. His arm twitches  pain stabs  jaw  spreads across  
face, making  vision go black at the edges   ears ring. blink  lurch  the side as the 
room dips  sways.  remember his fist coming at . 

am too off-balance  do anything but move away from him, as far as the arena will allow. He 
darts in front of   kicks  hard in the stomach. His foot forces the air from  lungs    
hurts, hurts so badly  ’t breathe, or maybe that’s because of the kick,  know, just fall. 

On your feet is the only thought in  mind. push myself up, but Peter is already there. He grabs 
 hair with one hand  punches  in the nose with the other. This pain is different, less like a 
stab  more like a crackle, crackling in  brain, spotting  vision with different colors, blue, 



green, red. try  shove him off,  hands slapping at his arms,    punches  again, this time 
in the ribs. My face is wet. Bloody nose. More red, guess, but   too dizzy  look down. 

He shoves   fall again, scraping  hands on the ground, blinking, sluggish  slow  
hot. cough  drag myself   feet. really should be lying down if the room is spinning this fast. 
And Peter spins around ; am the center of a spinning planet, the only thing staying still. 
Something hits  from the side  almost fall over again. 

On  feet on  feet. see a solid mass in front of , a body. punch as hard as ,   fist 
hits something soft. Peter barely groans,  smacks  ear with the flat of his palm, laughing under 
his breath. hear ringing  try  blink some of the black patches out of  eyes; how did 
something get in  eye? 

Out of  peripheral vision, see Four shove the door open  walk out. Apparently this fight isn’t 
interesting enough for him. Or maybe  ’s going  find out why everything’s spinning like a top,  
 blame him; want  know the answer too. 

My knees give out  the floor is cool against  cheek. Something slams into  side  
scream for the first time, a high screech that belongs  someone else  not ,    slams into  
side again,   ’t see anything at all, not even whatever is right in front of  face, the lights out. 
Someone shouts, “Enough!”  think too much  nothing at all. 

When wake up,  feel much, but the inside of  head is fuzzy, like  ’s packed with cotton 
balls. 

know that lost,  the only thing keeping the pain at bay is what is making   difficult  think 
straight. 

“Is her eye already black?” someone asks. 

open one eye—the other stays shut like  ’s glued that  . Sitting   right are Will  Al; 
Christina sits on the bed   left with an ice pack on her jaw. 

“What happened  your face?” say. My lips feel clumsy  too large. 

She laughs. “Look who’s talking. Should we get  an eye patch?” 

“Well, already know what happened   face,” say. “was there. Sort of.” 

“Did  just make a joke, Tris?” Will says, grinning. “We should get  on painkillers more often 
if you’re going  start cracking jokes. Oh,   answer your question—beat her up.” 

“ ’t believe  couldn’t beat Will,” Al says, shaking his head. 

“What? He’s good,” she says, shrugging. “Plus, think I’ve finally learned how  stop losing. just 
need  stop people from punching  in the jaw.” 

“You know, you’d think  would have figured that out already.” Will winks at her. “Now know 
why  aren’t Erudite. Not too bright, are ?” 

“You feeling okay, Tris?” Al says. His eyes are dark brown, almost the same color as Christina’s 
skin. His cheek looks rough, like if   didn’t shave  ,   would have a thick beard. Hard  believe 
 ’s only sixteen. 

“Yeah,” say. “Just wish could stay here forever so never have  see Peter again.” 

But  know where “here” is. am in a large, narrow room with a row of beds on either side. 
Some of the beds have curtains between them. On the right side of the room is a nurse’s station. This 
must be where the Dauntless go when they’re sick or hurt. The woman there looks at   over a 
clipboard. I’ve never seen a nurse with so many piercings in her ear before. Some Dauntless must 
volunteer  do jobs that traditionally belong  other factions. After all,   wouldn’t make sense for 



the Dauntless  make the trek  the city hospital every time they get hurt. 

The first time went  the hospital, was six years old. My mother fell on the sidewalk in front of 
our house  broke her arm. Hearing her scream made  burst into tears, but Caleb just ran for  
father without saying a word. At the hospital, an Amity woman in a yellow shirt with clean fingernails 
took  mother’s blood pressure  set her bone with a smile. 

remember Caleb telling her that   would only take a month  mend, because   was a hairline 
fracture. thought   was reassuring her, because that’s what selfless people do, but now wonder if 
  was repeating something   had studied; if all his Abnegation tendencies were just Erudite traits in 
disguise. 

“Don’t worry about Peter,” says Will. “He’ll at least get beat up by Edward, who has been studying 
hand--hand combat since we were ten years old. For fun.” 

“Good,” says Christina. She checks her watch. “think we’re missing dinner. Do  want    stay 
here, Tris?” 

shake  head. “  fine.” 

Christina  Will get up, but A1 waves them ahead. He has a distinct smell—sweet  fresh, like 
sage  lemongrass. When   tosses  turns at night, get a whiff of    know  ’s having a 
nightmare. 

“just wanted  tell  that  missed Eric’s announcement. We’re going on a field trip 
tomorrow,  the fence,  learn about Dauntless jobs,”   says. “We have  be at the train by eight 
fifteen.” 

“Good,” say. “Thanks.” 

“And  pay attention  Christina. Your face doesn’t look that bad.” He smiles a little. “mean, 
  looks good.  always looks good. mean—you look brave. Dauntless.” 

His eyes skirt mine,    scratches the back of his head. The silence seems  grow between  .  
was a nice thing  say, but   acts like   meant more than just the words. hope am wrong. could 
not be attracted  A1—could not be attracted  anyone that fragile. smile as much as  bruised 
cheek will allow, hoping that will diffuse the tension. 

“should let  rest,”   says. He gets up  leave, but before    go, grab his wrist. 

“Al, are  okay?” say. He stares blankly at ,  add, “mean, is   getting any easier?” 

“Uh...” He shrugs. “Alittle.” 

He pulls his hand free  shoves   in his pocket. The question must have embarrassed him, 
because I’ve never seen him so red before.  spent  nights sobbing into  pillow, would be a 
little embarrassed too. At least when cry, know how  hide  . 

“lost  Drew. After your fight with Peter.” He looks at . “took a few hits, fell down,  
stayed there. Even though didn’t have . figure...figure that since beat Will, if lose all the 
rest, won’t be ranked last, but won’t have  hurt anyone anymore.” 

“Is that really what  want?” 

He looks down. “just  ’t do  . Maybe that means   a coward.” 

“You’re not a coward just because   want  hurt people,” say, because know  ’s the 
right thing  say, even if   not sure mean  . 

For a moment we are both still, looking at each other. Maybe do mean  .    is a coward,   isn’t 
because   doesn’t enjoy pain.  is because   refuses  act. 

He gives  a pained look  says, “You think our families will visit  ? They say transfer 



families never come on Visiting Day.” 

“ know,” say. “ know if   would be good or bad if they did.” 

“think bad.” He nods. “Yeah,  ’s already hard enough.” He nods again, as if confirming what   
just said,  walks away. 

In less than a week, the Abnegation initiates will be able  visit their families for the first time 
since the Choosing Ceremony. They will go home  sit in their living rooms  interact with their 
parents for the first time as adults. 

used  look forward  that day. used  think about what would say   mother  father 
when was allowed  ask them questions at the dinner table. 

In less than a week, the Dauntless-born initiates will find their families on the Pit floor, or in the 
glass building above the compound,  do whatever   is the Dauntless do when they reunite. Maybe 
they take turns throwing knives at each other’s heads—  wouldn’t surprise . 

And the transfer initiates with forgiving parents will be able  see them again too. suspect mine 
will not be among them. Not after  father’s cry of outrage at the ceremony. Not after both their 
children left them. 

Maybe if could have told them was Divergent,  was confused about what  choose, they 
would have understood. Maybe they would have helped  figure out what Divergent is,  what   
means,  why  ’s dangerous. But didn’t trust them with that secret, so will never know. 

clench  teeth as the tears come. am fed up. am fed up with tears  weakness. But there 
isn’t much  do  stop them. 

Maybe drift off  sleep,  maybe . Later that night, though, slip out of the room  go 
back  the dormitory. The only thing worse than letting Peter put  in the hospital would be letting 
him put  there overnight. 

The next morning,  hear the alarm, shuffling feet, or conversations as the other initiates get 
ready. wake  Christina shaking  shoulder with one hand  tapping  cheek with the other. 
She already wears a black jacket zipped up  her throat.  she has bruises from yesterday’s fight, her 
dark skin makes them difficult  see. 

“Come on,” she says. “Up  at ’em.” 

dreamt that Peter tied   a chair  asked  if was Divergent. answered no,    
punched  until said yes. woke up with wet cheeks. 

mean  say something, but all  do is groan. My body aches so badly   hurts  breathe.  
doesn’t help that last night’s bout of crying made  eyes swell. Christina offers  her hand. 

The clock reads eight. We’re supposed  be at the tracks by eight fifteen. 

“I’ll run  get   some breakfast. You just...get ready. Looks like   might take  a while,” she 
says. 

grunt. Trying not  bend at the waist, fumble in the drawer under  bed for a clean shirt. 
Luckily Peter isn’t here  see  struggle. Once Christina leaves, the dormitory is empty. 

unbutton  shirt  stare at  bare side, which is patched with bruises. For a second the colors 
mesmerize , bright green  deep blue  brown. change as fast as   let  hair hang 
loose because  ’t lift  arms  tie   back. 

look at  reflection in the small mirror on the back wall  see a stranger. She is blond like , 
with a narrow face like mine, but that’s where the similarities stop. / do not have a black eye,  a 
split lip,  a bruised jaw. / am not as pale as a sheet. She  ’t possibly be , though she moves 
when move. 

By the time Christina comes back, a muffin in each hand,   sitting on the edge of  bed, staring 
at  untied shoes. will have  bend over  tie them.  will hurt when bend over. 

But Christina just passes  a muffin  crouches in front of   tie  shoes. Gratitude surges 
in  chest, warm  a little like an ache. Maybe there is some Abnegation in everyone, even if they 
 know  . 

Well, in everyone but Peter. 

“Thank ,” say. 

“Well, we would never get there on time if  had  tie them yourself,” she says. “Come on. You 
 eat  walk at the same time, right?” 

We walk fast toward the Pit. The muffin is banana-flavored, with walnuts. My mother baked bread 
like this once  give  the factionless, but never got  try  . was too old for coddling at that 
point. ignore the pinch in  stomach that comes every time think of  mother  half walk, 
half jog after Christina, who forgets that her legs are longer than mine. 

We climb the steps from the Pit  the glass building above    run  the exit. Every thump of 
 feet sends pain through  ribs, but ignore  . We make    the tracks just as the train arrives, 
its horn blaring. 

“What took  so long?” Will shouts over the horn. 

“Stumpy Legs over here turned into an old lady overnight,” says Christina. 

“Oh, shut up.”   only half kidding. 


Four stands at the front of the pack, so close  the tracks that if   shifted even an inch forward, the 
train would take his nose with  . He steps back  let some of the others get on first. Will hoists 
himself into the car with some difficulty, landing first on his stomach  then dragging his legs in 
behind him. Four grabs the handle on the side of the car  pulls himself in smoothly, like   doesn’t 
have more than six feet of body  work with. 

jog next  the car, wincing, then grit  teeth  grab the handle on the side. This is going  
hurt. 

A1 grabs  under each arm  lifts  easily into the car. Pain shoots through  side, but   only 
lasts for a second. see Peter behind him,   cheeks get warm. A1 was trying  be nice, so 
smile at him, but wish people didn’t want  be so nice. As if Peter didn’t have enough ammunition 
already. 

“Feeling okay there?” Peter says, giving  a look of mock sympathy—his lips turned down, his 
arched eyebrows pulled in. “Or are  a little... Stiff?” 

He bursts into laughter at his joke,  Molly  Drew join in. Molly has an ugly laugh, all 
snorting  shaking shoulders,  Drew’s is silent, so   almost looks like  ’s in pain. 

“We are all awed by your incredible wit,” says Will. 

“Yeah, are  sure   belong with the Erudite, Peter?” Christina adds. “hear they  
object  sissies.” 

Four, standing in the doorway, speaks before Peter  retort. “Am going  have  listen  your 
bickering all the    the fence?” 

Everyone gets quiet,  Four turns back  the car’s opening. He holds the handles on either side, 
his arms stretching wide,  leans forward so his body is mostly outside the car, though his feet stay 
planted inside. The wind presses his shirt  his chest. try  look past him at what we’re passing—a 
sea of crumbling, abandoned buildings that get smaller as we go. 

Every few seconds, though,  eyes shift back  Four.  know what expect  see, or what 
want  see, if anything. But do   without thinking. 

ask Christina, “What do  think is out there?” nod  the doorway. “mean, beyond the fence.” 

She shrugs. “A bunch of farms, guess.” 

“Yeah, but mean...past the farms. What are we guarding the city from?” 

She wiggles her fingers at . “Monsters!” 

roll  eyes. 

“We didn’t even have guards near the fence until five years ago,” says Will. “Don’t  remember 
when Dauntless police used  patrol the factionless sector?” 

“Yes,” say. also remember that  father was one of the people who voted  get the Dauntless 
out of the factionless sector of the city. He said the poor didn’t need policing; they needed help,  
we could give    them. But would rather not mention that now, or here. ’s one of the many things 
Erudite gives as evidence of Abnegation’s incompetence. 

“Oh, right,”   says. “bet  saw them all the time.” 

“Why do  say that?” ask, a little too sharply.  want  be associated too closely with the 
factionless. 

“Because  had  pass the factionless sector  get  school, right?” 

“What did  do, memorize a map of the city for fun?” says Christina. 

“Yes,” says Will, looking puzzled. “Didn’t ?” 



The train’s brakes squeal,  we all lurch forward as the car slows. am grateful for the 
movement;   makes standing easier. The dilapidated buildings are gone, replaced by yellow fields  
train tracks. The train stops under an awning. lower myself  the grass, holding the handle  keep 
 steady. 

In front of  is a chain-link fence with barbed wire strung along the top. When walk forward, 
notice that   continues farther than  see, perpendicular  the horizon. Past the fence is a cluster 
of trees, most of them dead, some green. Milling around on the other side of the fence are Dauntless 
guards carrying guns. 

“Follow ,” says Four. stay close  Christina.  want  admit  , not even  myself, but 
feel calmer when   near her.  Peter tries  taunt , she will defend . 

Silently scold myself for being such a coward. Peter’s insults shouldn’t bother ,  should 
focus on getting better at combat, not on how badly did yesterday. And should be willing, if not 
able,  defend myself instead of relying on other people  do   for . 

Four leads   toward the gate, which is as wide as a house  opens up  the cracked road that 
leads  the city. When came here with  family as a child, we rode in a bus on that road  
beyond,  Amity’s farms, where we spent the day picking tomatoes  sweating through our shirts. 

Another pinch in  stomach. 

“   rank in the top five at the end of initiation,  will probably end up here,” says Four 
as   reaches the gate. “Once  are a fence guard, there is some potential for advancement, but not 
much. You may be able  go on patrols beyond Amity’s farms, but—” 

“Patrols for what purpose?” asks Will. 

Four lifts a shoulder. “suppose you’ll discover that if  find yourself among them. As was 
saying. For the most part, those who guard the fence when they are young continue  guard the fence. 
   comforts , some of them insist that   isn’t as bad as   seems.” 

“Yeah. At least we won’t be driving buses or cleaning up other people’s messes like the 
factionless,” Christina whispers in  ear. 

“What rank were ?” Peter asks Four. 

 expect Four  answer, but   looks levelly at Peter  says, “was first.” 

“And  chose  do this?” Peter’s eyes are wide  round  dark green. They would look 
innocent   if didn’t know what a terrible person   is. “Why didn’t  get a government job?” 

“didn’t want one,” Four says flatly. remember what   said on the first day, about working in the 
control room, where the Dauntless monitor the city’s security.  is difficult for   imagine him 
there, surrounded by computers. To    belongs in the training room. 

We learned about faction jobs in school. The Dauntless have limited options. We  guard the 
fence or work for the security of our city. We  work in the Dauntless compound, drawing tattoos or 
making weapons or even fighting each other for entertainment. Or we  work for the Dauntless 
leaders. That sounds like  best option. 

The only problem is that  rank is terrible. And might be factionless by the end of stage one. 

We stop next  the gate. A few Dauntless guards glance in our direction but not many. They are too 
busy pulling the doors—which are twice as tall as they are  several times wider—open  admit a 
truck. 

The man driving wears a hat, a beard,  a smile. He stops just inside the gate  gets out. The 
back of the truck is open,  a few other Amity sit among the stacks of crates. peer at the crates— 



they hold apples. 

“Beatrice?” an Amity boy says. 

My head jerks at the sound of  name. One of the Amity in the back of the truck stands. He has 
curly blond hair  a familiar nose, wide at the tip  narrow at the bridge. Robert. try  
remember him at the Choosing Ceremony  nothing comes  mind but the sound of  heart in  
ears. Who else transferred? Did Susan? Are there any Abnegation initiates this year?  Abnegation is 
fizzling,  ’s our fault—Robert’s  Caleb’s  mine. Mine. push the thought from  mind. 

Robert hops down from the truck. He wears a gray T-shirt  a pair of blue jeans. After a second’s 
hesitation,   moves toward   folds  in his arms. stiffen. Only in Amity do people hug each 
other in greeting.  move a muscle until   releases . 

His own smile fades when   looks at  again. “Beatrice, what happened  ? What happened 
 your face?” 

“Nothing,” say. “Just training. Nothing.” 

“Beatrice?” demands a nasal voice next  . Molly folds her arms  laughs. “Is that your real 
name, Stiff?” 

glance at her. “What did  think Tris was short for?” 

“Oh,  know.. .weakling?” She touches her chin.  her chin was bigger,   might balance out 
her nose, but   is weak  almost recedes into her neck. “Oh wait, that doesn’t start with Tris. My 
mistake.” 

“There’s no need  antagonize her,” Robert says softly. “  Robert,   are?” 

“Someone who doesn’t care what your name is,” she says. “Why   get back in your truck? 
We’re not supposed  fraternize with other faction members.” 

“Why   get away from  ?” snap. 

“Right. Wouldn’t want  get between   your boyfriend,” she says. She walks away smiling. 

Robert gives  a sad look. “They  seem like nice people.” 

“Some of them aren’t.” 

“You could go home,  know.   sure Abnegation would make an exception for .” 

“What makes  think want  go home?” ask,  cheeks hot. “You think  ’t handle this or 
something?” 

“’s not that.” He shakes his head. “’s not that   ’t,  ’s that  shouldn’t have . You 
should be happy.” 

“This is what chose. This is  .” look over Robert’s shoulder. The Dauntless guards seem  have 
finished examining the truck. The bearded man gets back into the driver’s seat  closes the door 
behind him. “Besides, Robert. The goal of  life isn’t just... be happy.” 

“Wouldn’t   be easier if   was, though?”   says. 

Before  answer,   touches  shoulder  turns toward the truck. A girl in the back has a 
banjo on her lap. She starts  strum   as Robert hoists himself inside,  the truck starts forward, 
carrying the banjo sounds  her warbling voice away from  . 

Robert waves  ,  again see another possible life in  mind’s eye. see myself in the back 
of the truck, singing with the girl, though I’ve never sung before, laughing when am off-key, 
climbing trees  pick the apples, always peaceful  always safe. 

The Dauntless guards close the gate  lock   behind them. The lock is on the outside. bite  
lip. Why would they lock the gate from the outside  not the inside?  almost seems like they  



want  keep something out; they want  keep   in. 

push the thought out of  head. That makes no sense. 

Four steps away from the fence, where   was talking  a female Dauntless guard with a gun 
balanced on her shoulder a moment before. “am worried that  have a knack for making unwise 
decisions,”   says when  ’s a foot away from . 

cross  arms. “ was a two-minute conversation.” 

“ think a smaller time frame makes   any less unwise.” He furrows his eyebrows  touches 
the corner of  bruised eye with his fingertips. My head jerks back, but   doesn’t take his hand 
away. Instead   tilts his head  sighs. “You know, if  could just learn  attack first,  might 
do better.” 

“Attack first?” say. “How will that help?” 

“You’re fast.    get a few good hits in before they know what’s going on,  could win.” 
He shrugs,  his hand falls. 

“  surprised  know that,” say quietly, “since  left halfway through  one  only 
fight.” 

“ wasn’t something wanted  watch,”   says. 

What’s that supposed  mean? 

He clears his throat. “Looks like the next train is here. Time  go, Tris.” 

crawl across  mattress  heave a sigh.  has been two days since  fight with Peter,   
bruises are turning purple-blue. have gotten used  aching every time move, so now move better, 
but am still far from healed. 

Even though am still injured, had  fight again today. Luckily this time, was paired against 
Myra, who couldn’t throw a good punch if someone was controlling her arm for her. got a good hit in 
during the first two minutes. She fell down  was too dizzy  get back up. should feel triumphant, 
but there is no triumph in punching a girl like Myra. 

The second touch  head  the pillow, the door  the dormitory opens,  people stream into 
the room with flashlights. sit up, almost hitting  head on the bed frame above ,  squint 
through the dark  see what’s going on. 

“Everybody up!” someone roars. A flashlight shines behind his head, making the rings in his ears 
glint. Eric. Surrounding him are other Dauntless, some of whom have seen in the Pit, some of whom 
have never seen before. Four stands among them. 

His eyes shift  mine  stay there. stare back  forget that all around  the transfers are 
getting out of bed. 

“Did  go deaf, Stiff?” demands Eric. snap out of  daze  slide out from beneath the 
blankets. am glad sleep fully clothed, because Christina stands next  our bunk wearing only a T- 
shirt, her long legs bare. She folds her arms  stares at Eric. wish, suddenly, that could stare so 
boldly at someone with hardly any clothes on, but would never be able  do that. 

“You have five minutes  get dressed  meet   by the tracks,” says Eric. “We’re going on 
another field trip.” 

shove  feet into shoes  sprint, wincing, behind Christina on the    the train. A drop of 
sweat rolls down the back of  neck as we run up the paths along the walls of the Pit, pushing past 
members on our   up. They  seem surprised  see  . wonder how many frantic, running 
people they see on a weekly basis. 

We make    the tracks just behind the Dauntless-born initiates. Next  the tracks is a black pile. 
make out a cluster of long gun barrels  trigger guards. 

“Are we going  shoot something?” Christina hisses in  ear. 

Next  the pile are boxes of what looks like ammunition. inch closer  read one of the boxes. 
Written on   is “PAINTBALLS.” 

I’ve never heard of them before, but the name is self-explanatory. laugh. 

“Everyone grab a gun!” shouts Eric. 

We rush toward the pile. am the closest   , so snatch the first gun  find, which is heavy, 
but not too heavy for   lift,  grab a box of paintballs. shove the box in  pocket  sling 
the gun across  back so the strap crosses  chest. 

“Time estimate?” Eric asks Four. 

Four checks his watch. “Any minute now. How long is   going  take   memorize the train 
schedule?” 

“Why should , when have   remind  of  ?” says Eric, shoving Four’s shoulder. 

A circle of light appears on  left, far away.  grows larger as   comes closer, shining against the 


side of Four’s face, creating a shadow in the faint hollow beneath his cheekbone. 

He is the first  get on the train,  run after him, not waiting for Christina or Will or A1  
follow . Four turns around as fall into stride next  the car  holds out a hand. grab his arm, 
   pulls  in. Even the muscles in his forearm are taut, defined. 

let go quickly, without looking at him,  sit down on the other side of the car. 

Once everyone is in, Four speaks up. 

“We’ll be dividing into two teams  play capture the flag. Each team will have an even mix of 
members, Dauntless-born initiates,  transfers. One team will get off first  find a place  hide 
their flag. Then the second team will get off  do the same.” The car sways,  Four grabs the side 
of the doorway for balance. “This is a Dauntless tradition, so suggest  take   seriously.” 

“What do we get if we win?” someone shouts. 

“Sounds like the kind of question someone not from Dauntless would ask,” says Four, raising an 
eyebrow. “You get  win, of course.” 

“Four  will be your team captains,” says Eric. He looks at Four. “Let’s divide up transfers first, 
shall we?” 

tilt  head back.  they’re picking  , will be chosen last;  feel  . 

“You go first,” Four says. 

Eric shrugs. “Edward.” 

Four leans against the door frame  nods. The moonlight makes his eyes bright. He scans the 
group of transfer initiates briefly, without calculation,  says, “want the Stiff.” 

A faint undercurrent of laughter fills the car. Heat rushes into  cheeks.  know whether  
be angry at the people laughing at  or flattered by the fact that   chose  first. 

“Got something  prove?” asks Eric, with his trademark smirk. “Or are  just picking the weak 
ones so that if  lose, you’ll have someone  blame   on?” 

Four shrugs. “Something like that.” 

Angry. should definitely be angry. scowl at  hands. Whatever Four’s strategy is,  ’s based on 
the idea that am weaker than the other initiates. And   gives  a bitter taste in  mouth. have  
prove him wrong—have . 

“Your turn,” says Four. 

“Peter.” 

“Christina.” 

That throws a wrench in his strategy. Christina is not one of the weak ones. What exactly is   
doing? 

“Molly.” 

“Will,” says Four, biting his thumbnail. 

“Al.” 

“Drew.” 

“Last one left is Myra. So she’s with ,” says Eric. “Dauntless-born initiates next.” 

stop listening once they’re finished with  .  Four isn’t trying  prove something by choosing 
the weak, what is   doing? look at each person   chooses. What do we have in common? 

Once they’re halfway through the Dauntless-born initiates, have an idea of what   is. With the 
exception of Will  a couple of the others, we all share the same body type: narrow shoulders, small 
frames. All the people on Eric’s team are broad  strong. Just yesterday, Four told  was fast. 



We will all be faster than Eric’s team, which will probably be good for capture the flag—haven’t 
played before, but know  ’s a game of speed rather than brute force. cover a smile with  hand. 
Eric is more ruthless than Four, but Four is smarter. 

They finish choosing teams,  Eric smirks at Four. 

“Your team  get off second,” says Eric. 

“Don’t do  any favors,” Four replies. He smiles a little. “You know  need them  win.” 

“No, know that you’ll lose no matter when  get off,” says Eric, biting down briefly on one of 
the rings in his lip. “Take your scrawny team  get off first, then.” 

We all stand up. A1 gives  a forlorn look,  smile back in what hope is a reassuring  .  
any of the four of   had  end up on the same team as Eric, Peter,  Molly, at least   was him. 
They usually leave him alone. 

The train is about  dip  the ground. am determined  land on  feet. 

Just before jump, someone shoves  shoulder,  almost topple out of the train car.  
look back  see who   is—Molly, Drew, or Peter,   doesn’t matter which one. Before they  try   
again, jump. This time am ready for the momentum the train gives ,  run a few steps  
diffuse   but keep  balance. Fierce pleasure courses through   smile. ’s a small 
accomplishment, but   makes  feel Dauntless. 

One of the Dauntless-born initiates touches Four’s shoulder  asks, “When your team won, where 
did  put the flag?” 

“Telling  wouldn’t really be in the spirit of the exercise, Marlene,”   says coolly. 

“Come on, Four,” she whines. She gives him a flirtatious smile. He brushes her hand off his arm, 
 for some reason, find myself grinning. 

“Navy Pier,” another Dauntless-born initiate calls out. He is tall, with brown skin  dark eyes. 
Handsome. “My brother was on the winning team. They kept the flag at the carousel.” 

“Fet’s go there, then,” suggests Will. 

No one objects, so we walk east, toward the marsh that was once a lake. When was young, tried 
 imagine what   would look like as a lake, with no fence built into the mud  keep the city safe. But 
  is difficult  imagine that much water in one place. 

“We’re close  Erudite headquarters, right?” asks Christina, bumping Will’s shoulder with her 
own. 

“Yeah. ’s south of here,”   says. He looks over his shoulder,  for a second his expression is 
full of longing. Then  ’s gone. 

am less than a mile away from  brother.  has been a week since we were that close together. 
shake  head a little  get the thought out of  mind.  ’t think about him today, when have  
focus on making   through stage one.  ’t think about him any day. 

We walk across the bridge. We still need the bridges because the mud beneath them is too wet  
walk on. wonder how long  ’s been since the river dried up. 

Once we cross the bridge, the city changes. Behind  , most of the buildings were in use,  even if 
they weren’t, they looked well-tended. In front of   is a sea of crumbling concrete  broken glass. 
The silence of this part of the city is eerie;   feels like a nightmare. ’s hard  see where   going, 
because  ’s after midnight  all the city lights are off. 

Marlene takes out a flashlight  shines   at the street in front of  . 

“Scared of the dark, Mar?” the dark-eyed Dauntless-born initiate teases. 



“  want  step on broken glass, Uriah, be  guest,” she snaps. But she turns   off anyway. 

have realized that part of being Dauntless is being willing  make things more difficult for 
yourself in order  be self-sufficient. There’s nothing especially brave about wandering dark streets 
with no flashlight, but we are not supposed  need help, even from light. We are supposed  be 
capable of anything. 

like that. Because there might come a day when there is no flashlight, there is no gun, there is no 
guiding hand. And want  be ready for  . 

The buildings end just before the marsh. A strip of land juts out into the marsh,  rising from   is 
a giant white wheel with dozens of red passenger cars dangling from   at regular intervals. The Ferris 
wheel. 

“Think about  . People used  ride that thing. For fun,” says Will, shaking his head. 

“They must have been Dauntless,” say. 

“Yeah, but a lame version of Dauntless.” Christina laughs. “A Dauntless Ferris wheel wouldn’t have 
cars. You would just hang on tight with your hands,  good luck  .” 

We walk down the side of the pier. All the buildings on  left are empty, their signs torn down  
their windows closed, but   is a clean kind of emptiness. Whoever left these places left them by 
choice  at their leisure. Some places in the city are not like that. 

“Dare   jump into the marsh,” says Christina  Will. 

“You first.” 

We reach the carousel. Some of the horses are scratched  weathered, their tails broken off or 
their saddles chipped. Four takes the flag out of his pocket. 

“In ten minutes, the other team will pick their location,”   says. “suggest  take this time  
formulate a strategy. We may not be Erudite, but mental preparedness is one aspect of your Dauntless 
training. Arguably,   is the most important aspect.” 

He is right about that. What good is a prepared body if  have a scattered mind? 

Will takes the flag from Four. 

“Some people should stay here  guard,  some people should go out  scout the other team’s 
location,” Will says. 

“Yeah? You think?” Marlene plucks the flag from Will’s fingers. “Who put  in charge, 
transfer?” 

“No one,” says Will. “But someone’s got  do  .” 

“Maybe we should develop a more defensive strategy. Wait for them  come   , then take them 
out,” suggests Christina. 

“That’s the sissy   out,” Uriah says. “vote we go all out. Hide the flag well enough that they 
 ’t find  .” 

Everyone bursts into the conversation at once, their voices louder with each passing second. 
Christina defends Will’s plan; the Dauntless-born initiates vote for offense; everyone argues about 
who should make the decision. Four sits down on the edge of the carousel, leaning against a plastic 
horse’s foot. His eyes lift  the sky, where there are no stars, only a round moon peeking through a 
thin layer of clouds. The muscles in his arms are relaxed; his hand rests on the back of his neck. He 
looks almost comfortable, holding that gun  his shoulder. 

close  eyes briefly. Why does   distract  so easily? need  focus. 

What would say if could shout above the sniping behind ? We  ’t act until we know where 



the other team is. They could be anywhere within a two-mile radius, although  rule out the empty 
marsh as an option. The best    find them is not  argue about how  search for them, or how 
many  send out in a search party. 

’s  climb as high as possible. 

look over  shoulder  make sure no one is watching. None of them look at , so walk 
toward the Ferris wheel with light, quiet footsteps, pressing  gun   back with one hand  keep 
  from making noise. 

When stare up at the Ferris wheel from the ground,  throat feels tighter.  is taller than 
thought, so tall  barely see the cars swinging at the top. The only good thing about its height is 
that   is built  support weight.  climb  ,   won’t collapse beneath . 

My heart pumps faster. Will really risk  life for this—to win a game the Dauntless like  play? 

’s so dark  barely see them, but when stare at the huge, rusted supports holding the wheel in 
place, see the rungs of a ladder. Each support is only as wide as  shoulders,  there are no 
railings  hold  in, but climbing a ladder is better than climbing the spokes of the wheel. 

grab a rung. ’s rusty  thin  feels like   might crumble in  hands. put  weight on the 
lowest rung  test    jump  make sure   will hold  up. The movement hurts  ribs,  
wince. 

“Tris,” a low voice says behind .  know why   doesn’t startle . Maybe because am 
becoming Dauntless,  mental readiness is something am supposed  develop. Maybe because his 
voice is low  smooth  almost soothing. Whatever the reason, look over  shoulder. Four 
stands behind  with his gun slung across his back, just like mine. 

“Yes?” say. 

“came  find out what  think you’re doing.” 

“  seeking higher ground,” say. “ think   doing anything.” 

see his smile in the dark. “All right.   coming.” 

pause a second. He doesn’t look at  the   Will, Christina,  A1 sometimes do—like am 
too small  too weak  be of any use,  they pity  for  . But if   insists on coming with ,   
is probably because   doubts . 

“I’ll be fine,” say. 

“Undoubtedly,”   replies.  hear the sarcasm, but know  ’s there.  has  be. 

climb,  when   a few feet off the ground,   comes after . He moves faster than do,  
soon his hands find the rungs that  feet leave. 

“So tell ...,”   says quietly as we climb. He sounds breathless. “What do  think the purpose 
of this exercise is? The game, mean, not the climbing.” 

stare down at the pavement.  seems far away now, but   not even a third of the   up. Above 
 is a platform, just below the center of the wheel. That’s  destination.  even think about 
how will climb back down. The breeze that brushed  cheeks earlier now presses against  side. 
The higher we go, the stronger   will get. need  be ready. 

“Learning about strategy,” say. “Teamwork, maybe.” 

“Teamwork,”   repeats. A laugh hitches in his throat.  sounds like a panicked breath. 

“Maybe not,” say. “Teamwork doesn’t seem  be a Dauntless priority.” 

The wind is stronger now. press closer  the white support so  fall, but that makes   hard  
climb. Below  the carousel looks small.  barely see  team under the awning. Some of them 



are missing—a search party must have left. 

Four says, “’s supposed  be a priority.  used  be.” 

But   not really listening, because the height is dizzying. My hands ache from holding the rungs, 
  legs are shaking, but   not sure why.  isn’t the height that scares me—the height makes  
feel alive with energy, every organ  vessel  muscle in  body singing at the same pitch. 

Then realize what   is. ’s him. Something about him makes  feel like am about  fall. Or 
turn  liquid. Or burst into flames. 

My hand almost misses the next rung. 

“Now tell ...,”   says through a bursting breath, “what do  think learning strategy has  do 
with... bravery?” 

The question reminds  that   is  instructor,  am supposed  learn something from this. 
A cloud passes over the moon,  the light shifts across  hands. 

“...  prepares   act,” say finally. “You learn strategy so   use  .” hear him 
breathing behind , loud  fast. “Are  all right, Four?” 

“Are  human, Tris? Being up this high...” He gulps for air. “ doesn’t scare  at all?” 

look over  shoulder at the ground.  fall now, will die. But  think will fall. 

A gust of air presses against  left side, throwing  body weight  the right. gasp  cling  
the rungs,  balance shifting. Four’s cold hand clamps around one of  hips, one of his fingers 
finding a strip of bare skin just under the hem of  T-shirt. He squeezes, steadying   pushing 
 gently  the left, restoring  balance. 

Now  ’t breathe. pause, staring at  hands,  mouth dry. feel the ghost of where his hand 
was, his fingers long  narrow. 

“You okay?”   asks quietly. 

“Yes,” say,  voice strained. 

keep climbing, silently, until reach the platform. Judging by the blunted ends of metal rods,   
used  have railings, but   doesn’t anymore. sit down  scoot  the end of   so Four has 
somewhere  sit. Without thinking, put  legs over the side. Four, however, crouches  presses 
his back  the metal support, breathing heavily. 

“You’re afraid of heights,” say. “How do  survive in the Dauntless compound?” 

“ignore  fear,”   says. “When make decisions, pretend   doesn’t exist.” 

stare at him for a second.  ’t help  . To  there’s a difference between not being afraid  
acting in spite of fear, as   does. 

have been staring at him too long. 

“What?”   says quietly. 

“Nothing.” 

look away from him  toward the city. have  focus. climbed up here for a reason. 

The city is pitch-black, but even if   wasn’t, wouldn’t be able  see very far. A building stands in 
  . 

“We’re not high enough,” say. look up. Above  is a tangle of white bars, the wheel’s 
scaffolding.  climb carefully,  wedge  feet between the supports  the crossbars  stay 
secure. Or as secure as possible. 

“  going  climb,” say, standing up. grab one of the bars above  head  pull myself up. 
Shooting pains go through  bruised sides, but ignore them. 



“For God’s sake, Stiff,”   says. 

“You  have  follow ,” say, staring at the maze of bars above . shove  foot onto 
the place where two bars cross  push myself up, grabbing another bar in the process. sway for a 
second,  heart beating so hard  ’t feel anything else. Every thought have condenses into that 
heartbeat, moving at the same rhythm. 

“Yes, do,”   says. 

This is crazy,  know  . A fraction of an inch of mistake, half a second of hesitation,   
life is over. Heat tears through  chest,  smile as grab the next bar. pull myself up,  arms 
shaking,  force  leg under  so   standing on another bar. When feel steady, look down at 
Four. But instead of seeing him, see straight  the ground. 

 ’t breathe. 

imagine  body plummeting, smacking into the bars as   falls down,   limbs at broken 
angles on the pavement, just like Rita’s sister when she didn’t make   onto the roof. Four grabs a bar 
with each hand  pulls himself up, easy, like  ’s sitting up in bed. But   is not comfortable or 
natural here—every muscle in his arm stands out.  is a stupid thing for   think when am one 
hundred feet off the ground. 

grab another bar, find another place  wedge  foot. When look at the city again, the building 
isn’t in   .   high enough  see the skyline. Most of the buildings are black against a navy 
sky, but the red lights at the top of the Hub are lit up. They blink half as fast as  heartbeat. 

Beneath the buildings, the streets look like tunnels. For a few seconds see only a dark blanket over 
the land in front of , just faint differences between building  sky  street  ground. Then 
see a tiny pulsing light on the ground. 

“See that?” say, pointing. 

Four stops climbing when  ’s right behind   looks over  shoulder, his chin next   
head. His breaths flutter against  ear,  feel shaky again, like did when was climbing the 
ladder. 

“Yeah,”   says. A smile spreads over his face. 

“’s coming from the park at the end of the pier,”   says. “Figures. ’s surrounded by open space, 
but the trees provide some camouflage. Obviously not enough.” 

“Okay,” say. look over  shoulder at him. We are so close forget where am; instead notice 
that the corners of his mouth turn down naturally, just like mine,  that   has a scar on his chin. 

“Urn,” say. clear  throat. “Start climbing down. I’ll follow .” 

Four nods  steps down. His leg is so long that   finds a place for his foot easily  guides his 
body between the bars. Even in darkness, see that his hands are bright red  shaking. 

step down with one foot, pressing  weight into one of the crossbars. The bar creaks beneath  
 comes loose, clattering against half a dozen bars on the   down  bouncing on the pavement. 
  dangling from the scaffolding with  toes swinging in midair. A strangled gasp escapes . 

“Four!” 

try  find another place  put  foot, but the nearest foothold is a few feet away, farther than 
 stretch. My hands are sweaty. remember wiping them on  slacks before the Choosing 
Ceremony, before the aptitude test, before every important moment,  suppress a scream. will slip. 
will slip. 

“Hold on!”   shouts. “Just hold on, have an idea.” 



He keeps climbing down. He’s moving in the wrong direction;   should be coming toward , not 
going away from . stare at  hands, which are wrapped around the narrow bar so tightly  
knuckles are white. My fingers are dark red, almost purple. They won’t last long. 

won’t last long. 

squeeze  eyes shut. Better not  look. Better  pretend that none of this exists. hear Four’s 
sneakers squeak against metal  rapid footsteps on ladder rungs. 

“Four!” yell. Maybe   left. Maybe   abandoned . Maybe this is a test of  strength, of  
bravery. breathe in  nose  out  mouth. count  breaths  calm down. One, two. In, out. 
Come on, Four is all  think. Come on, do something. 

Then hear something wheeze  creak. The bar   holding shudders,  scream through  
clenched teeth as fight  keep  grip. 

The wheel is moving. 

Air wraps around  ankles  wrists as the wind gushes up, like a geyser. open  eyes.   
moving—toward the ground. laugh, giddy with hysteria as the ground comes closer  closer. But 
  picking up speed.   drop at the right time, the moving cars  metal scaffolding will drag 
at  body  carry  with them,  then will really die. 

Every muscle in  body tenses as hurtle toward the ground. When  see the cracks in the 
sidewalk, drop,   body slams into the ground, feet first. My legs collapse beneath   pull 
 arms in, rolling as fast as   the side. The cement scrapes  face,  turn just in time  
see a car bearing down on , like a giant shoe about  crush . roll again,  the bottom of the 
car skims  shoulder. 

  safe. 

press  palms   face.  try  get up.  did,   sure would just fall back down. 
hear footsteps,  Four’s hands wrap around  wrists. let him pry  hands from  eyes. 

He encloses one of  hands perfectly between two of his. The warmth of his skin overwhelms the 
ache in  fingers from holding the bars. 

“You all right?”   asks, pressing our hands together. 

“Yeah.” 

He starts  laugh. 

After a second, laugh too. With  free hand, push myself  a sitting position. am aware of 
how little space there is between  —six inches at most. That space feels charged with electricity. 
feel like   should be smaller. 

He stands, pulling  up with him. The wheel is still moving, creating a wind that tosses  hair 
back. 

“You could have told  that the Ferris wheel still worked,” say. try  sound casual. “We 
wouldn’t have had  climb in the first place.” 

“would have, if had known,”   says. “Couldn’t just let  hang there, so took a risk. Come on, 
time  get their flag.” 

Four hesitates for a moment  then takes  arm, his fingertips pressing  the inside of  
elbow. In other factions,   would give  time  recover, but   is Dauntless, so   smiles at   
starts toward the carousel, where our team members guard our flag. And half run, half limp beside 
him. still feel weak, but  mind is awake, especially with his hand on . 

Christina is perched on one of the horses, her long legs crossed  her hand around the pole 



holding the plastic animal upright. Our flag is behind her, a glowing triangle in the dark. Three 
Dauntless-born initiates stand among the other worn  dirty animals. One of them has his hand on a 
horse’s head,  a scratched horse eye stares at  between his fingers. Sitting on the edge of the 
carousel is an older Dauntless, scratching her quadruple-pierced eyebrow with her thumb. 

“Where’d the others go?” asks Four. 

He looks as excited as feel, his eyes wide with energy. 

“Did  guys turn on the wheel?” the older girl says. “What the hell are  thinking? You might 
as well have just shouted ‘Here we are! Come  get  !”’ She shakes her head. “ lose again this 
year, the shame will be unbearable. Three years in a row?” 

“The wheel doesn’t matter,” says Four. “We know where they are.” 

“We?” says Christina, looking from Four  . 

“Yes, while the rest of  were twiddling your thumbs, Tris climbed the Ferris wheel  look for 
the other team,”   says. 

“What do we do now, then?” asks one of the Dauntless-born initiates through a yawn. 

Four looks at . Slowly the eyes of the other initiates, including Christina, migrate from him  
. tense  shoulders, about  shrug  say  know,  then an image of the pier 
stretching out beneath  comes into  mind. have an idea. 

“Split in half,” say. “Four of   go  the right side of the pier, three  the left. The other team is 
in the park at the end of the pier, so the group of four will charge as the group of three sneaks behind 
the other team  get the flag.” 

Christina looks at  like she no longer recognizes .  blame her. 

“Sounds good,” says the older girl, clapping her hands together. “Let’s get this night over with, 
shall we?” 

Christina joins  in the group going  the right, along with Uriah, whose smile looks white 
against his skin’s bronze. didn’t notice before, but   has a tattoo of a snake behind his ear. stare at 
its tail curling around his earlobe for a moment, but then Christina starts running  have  follow 
her. 

have  run twice as fast  match  short strides  her long ones. As run, realize that only 
one of   will get  touch the flag,    won’t matter that   was  plan   information that 
got      if   not the one who grabs  . Though  hardly breathe as   is, run faster,    on 
Christina’s heels. pull  gun around  body, holding  finger over the trigger. 

We reach the end of the pier,  clamp  mouth shut  keep  loud breaths in. We slow down 
so our footsteps aren’t as loud,  look for the blinking light again. Now that   on the ground,  ’s 
bigger  easier  see. point,  Christina nods, leading the   toward  . 

Then hear a chorus of yells, so loud they make  jump. hear puffs of air as paintballs go flying 
 splats as they find their targets. Our team has charged, the other team runs  meet  ,  the flag 
is almost unguarded. Uriah takes aim  shoots the last guard in the thigh. The guard, a short girl 
with purple hair, throws her gun  the ground in a tantrum. 

sprint  catch up  Christina. The flag hangs from a tree branch, high above  head. reach for 
 ,  so does Christina. 

“Come on, Tris,” she says. “You’re already the hero of the day. And  know   ’t reach   
anyway.” 

She gives  a patronizing look, the   people sometimes look at children when they act too 



adult,  snatches the flag from the branch. Without looking at , she turns  gives a whoop of 
victory. Uriah’s voice joins hers  then hear a chorus of yells in the distance. 

Uriah claps  shoulder,  try  forget about the look Christina gave . Maybe she’s right; 
I’ve already proved myself today. do not want  be greedy; do not want  be like Eric, terrified of 
other people’s strength. 

The shouts of triumph become infectious,  lift  voice  join in, running toward  
teammates. Christina holds the flag up high,  everyone clusters around her, grabbing her arm  lift 
the flag even higher.  ’t reach her, so stand off  the side, grinning. 

A hand touches  shoulder. 

“Well done,” Four says quietly. 

“ ’t believe missed  !” Will says again, shaking his head. Wind coming through the doorway of 
the train car blows his hair in every direction. 

“You were performing the very important job of staying out of our  ,” says Christina, beaming. 

A1 groans. “Why did have  be on the other team?” 

“Because life’s not fair, Albert. And the world is conspiring against ,” says Will. “Hey,  see 
the flag again?” 

Peter, Molly,  Drew sit across from the members in the corner. Their chests  backs are 
splattered with blue  pink paint,  they look dejected. They speak quietly, sneaking looks at the 
rest of  , especially Christina. That is the benefit of not holding the flag right now—am no one’s 
target. Or at least, no more than usual. 

“So  climbed the Ferris wheel, huh,” says Uriah. He stumbles across the car  sits next  . 
Marlene, the girl with the flirty smile, follows him. 

“Yes,” say. 

“Pretty smart of . Tike...Erudite smart,” Marlene says. “  Marlene.” 

“Tris,” say. At home, being compared  an Erudite would be an insult, but she says   like a 
compliment. 

“Yeah, know who  are,” she says. “The first jumper tends  stick in your head.” 

 has been years since jumped off a building in  Abnegation uniform;   has been decades. 

Uriah takes one of the paintballs from his gun  squeezes   between his thumb  index finger. 
The train lurches  the left,  Uriah falls against , his fingers pinching the paintball until a 
stream of pink, foul-smelling paint sprays on  face. 

Marlene collapses in giggles. wipe some of the paint from  face, slowly,  then smear   on 
his cheek. The scent of fish oil wafts through the train car. 

“Ew!” He squeezes the ball at  again, but the opening is at the wrong angle,  the paint sprays 
into his mouth instead. He coughs  makes exaggerated gagging sounds. 

wipe  face with  sleeve, laughing so hard  stomach hurts. 

  entire life is like this, loud laughter  bold action  the kind of exhaustion  feel after a 
hard but satisfying day, will be content. As Uriah scrapes his tongue with his fingertips, realize that 
all have  do is get through initiation,  that life will be mine. 

The next morning, when trudge into the training room, yawning, a large target stands at one end of 
the room,  next  the door is a table with knives strewn across  . Target practice again. At least   
won’t hurt. 

Eric stands in the middle of the room, his posture so rigid   looks like someone replaced his spine 
with a metal rod. The sight of him makes  feel like all the air in the room is heavier, bearing down 
on . At least when   was slouched against a wall, could pretend   wasn’t here. Today  ’t 
pretend. 

“Tomorrow will be the last day of stage one,” Eric says. “You will resume fighting then. Today, 
you’ll be learning how  aim. Everyone pick up three knives.” His voice is deeper than usual. “And 
pay attention while Four demonstrates the correct technique for throwing them.” 

At first no one moves. 

“Now!” 

We scramble for daggers. They aren’t as heavy as guns, but they still feel strange in  hands, like 
am not allowed  hold them. 

“He’s in a bad mood today,” mumbles Christina. 

“Is   ever in a good mood?” murmur back. 

But know what she means. Judging by the poisonous look Eric gives Four when   isn’t paying 
attention, last night’s loss must have bothered Eric more than   let on. Winning capture the flag is a 
matter of pride,  pride is important  the Dauntless. More important than reason or sense. 

watch Four’s arm as   throws a knife. The next time   throws, watch his stance. He hits the 
target each time, exhaling as   releases the knife. 

Eric orders, “Line up!” 

Haste, think, will not help. My mother told  that when was learning how  knit. have  
think of this as a mental exercise, not a physical exercise. So spend the first few minutes practicing 
without a knife, finding the right stance, learning the right arm motion. 

Eric paces too quickly behind  . 

“think the Stiff’s taken too many hits  the head!” remarks Peter, a few people down. “Hey, Stiff! 
Remember what a knife is?” 

Ignoring him, practice the throw again with a knife in hand but  release  . shut out Eric’s 
pacing,  Peter’s jeering,  the nagging feeling that Four is staring at ,  throw the knife.  
spins end over end, slamming into the board. The blade doesn’t stick, but   the first person  hit the 
target. 

smirk as Peter misses again.  ’t help myself. 

“Hey, Peter,” say. “Remember what a target is?” 

Next  , Christina snorts,  her next knife hits the target. 

A half hour later, A1 is the only initiate who hasn’t hit the target yet. His knives clatter  the floor, 
or bounce off the wall. While the rest of   approach the board  collect our weapons,   hunts the 
floor for his. 

The next time   tries  misses, Eric marches toward him  demands, “How slow are , 
Candor? Do  need glasses? Should move the target closer  ?” 


ATs face turns red. He throws another knife,  this one sails a few feet  the right of the target.  
spins  hits the wall. 

“What was that, initiate?” says Eric quietly, leaning closer  Al. 

bite  lip. This isn’t good. 

“—  slipped,” says Al. 

“Well, think  should go get  ,” Eric says. He scans the other initiates’ faces—everyone has 
stopped throwing again—and says, “Did tell   stop?” 

Knives start  hit the board. We have all seen Eric angry before, but this is different. The look in 
his eyes is almost rabid. 

“Go get  ?” Al’s eyes are wide. “But everyone’s still throwing.” 

“And?” 

“And  want  get hit.” 

“think   trust your fellow initiates  aim better than .” Eric smiles a little, but his eyes 
stay cruel. “Go get your knife.” 

Al doesn’t usually object  anything the Dauntless tell    do.  think  ’s afraid ;   just 
knows that objecting is useless. This time Al sets his wide jaw. He’s reached the limits of his 
compliance. 

“No,”   says. 

“Why not?” Eric’s beady eyes fix on Al’s face. “Are  afraid?” 

“Of getting stabbed by an airborne knife?” says Al. “Yes, am!” 

Honesty is his mistake. Not his refusal, which Eric might have accepted. 

“Everyone stop!” Eric shouts. 

The knives stop,  so does all conversation. hold  small dagger tightly. 

“Clear out of the ring.” Eric looks at Al. “All except .” 

drop the dagger    hits the dusty floor with a thud. follow the other initiates  the edge of the 
room,  they inch in front of , eager  see what makes  stomach turn: Al, facing Eric’s wrath. 

“Stand in front of the target,” says Eric. 

Al’s big hands shake. He walks back  the target. 

“Hey, Four.” Eric looks over his shoulder. “Give  a hand here, huh?” 

Four scratches one of his eyebrows with a knife point  approaches Eric. He has dark circles 
under his eyes  a tense set  his mouth— ’s as tired as we are. 

“You’re going  stand there as   throws those knives,” Eric says  Al, “until  learn not  
flinch.” 

“Is this really necessary?” says Four. He sounds bored, but   doesn’t look bored. His face  body 
are tense, alert. 

squeeze  hands into fists. No matter how casual Four sounds, the question is a challenge. And 
Four doesn’t often challenge Eric directly. 

At first Eric stares at Four in silence. Four stares back. Seconds pass   fingernails bite  
palms. 

“have the authority here, remember?” Eric says, so quietly  barely hear him. “Here,  
everywhere else.” 

Color rushes into Four’s face, though his expression does not change. His grip on the knives 
tightens  his knuckles turn white as   turns  face Al. 



look from Al’s wide, dark eyes  his shaking hands  the determined set of Four’s jaw. Anger 
bubbles in  chest,  bursts from  mouth: “Stop  .” 

Four turns the knife in his hand, his fingers moving painstakingly over the metal edge. He gives  
such a hard look that feel like  ’s turning   stone. know why. am stupid for speaking up 
while Eric is here; am stupid for speaking up at all. 

“Any idiot  stand in front of a target,” say. “ doesn’t prove anything except that you’re 
bullying  . Which, as recall, is a sign of cowardice.” 

“Then   should be easy for ,” Eric says. “ you’re willing  take his place.” 

The last thing want  do is stand in front of that target, but  ’t back down now. didn’t leave 
myself the option. weave through the crowd of initiates,  someone shoves  shoulder. 

“There goes your pretty face,” hisses Peter. “Oh, wait. You  have one.” 

recover  balance  walk toward Al. He nods at . try  smile encouragingly, but  ’t 
manage  . stand in front of the board,   head doesn’t even reach the center of the target, but   
doesn’t matter. look at Four’s knives: one in his right hand, two in his left hand. 

My throat is dry. try  swallow,  then look at Four. He is never sloppy. He won’t hit . I’ll be 
fine. 

tip  chin up. will not flinch.  flinch, prove  Eric that this is not as easy as said   was; 
prove that   a coward. 

“  flinch,” Four says, slowly, carefully, “Al takes your place. Understand?” 

nod. 

Four’s eyes are still on mine when   lifts his hand, pulls his elbow back,  throws the knife.  is 
just a flash in the air,  then hear a thud. The knife is buried in the board, half a foot away from  
cheek. close  eyes. Thank God. 

“You about done, Stiff?” asks Four. 

remember Al’s wide eyes  his quiet sobs at night  shake  head. “No.” 

“Eyes open, then.” He taps the spot between his eyebrows. 

stare at him, pressing  hands   sides so no one  see them shake. He passes a knife from 
his left hand  his right hand,  see nothing but his eyes as the second knife hits the target above 
 head. This one is closer than the last one—feel   hovering over  skull. 

“Come on, Stiff,”   says. “Let someone else stand there  take  .” 

Why is   trying  goad  into giving up? Does   want   fail? 

“Shut up, Four!” 

hold  breath as   turns the last knife in his hand. see a glint in his eyes as   pulls his arm 
back  lets the knife fly.  comes straight at , spinning, blade over handle. My body goes rigid. 
This time, when   hits the board,  ear stings,  blood tickles  skin. touch  ear. He nicked 
 . 

And judging by the look   gives ,   did   on purpose. 

“would love  stay  see if the rest of  are as daring as she is,” says Eric, his voice smooth, 
“but think that’s enough for today.” 

He squeezes  shoulder. His fingers feel dry  cold,  the look   gives  claims , like 
 ’s taking ownership of what did.  return Eric’s smile. What did had nothing  do with 
him. 

“should keep  eye on ,”   adds. 



Fear prickles inside , in  chest  in  head  in  hands. feel like the word 
“DIVERGENT” is branded on  forehead,  if   looks at  long enough,  ’ll be able  read  . 
But   just lifts his hand from  shoulder  keeps walking. 

Four  stay behind. wait until the room is empty  the door is shut before looking at him 
again. He walks toward . 

“Is your—”   begins. 

“You did that on purpose !” shout. 

“Yes, did,”   says quietly. “And  should thank  for helping .” 

grit  teeth. “Thank ? You almost stabbed  ear,   spent the entire time taunting . 
Why should thank ?” 

“You know,   getting a little tired of waiting for   catch on!” 

He glares at ,  even when   glares, his eyes look thoughtful. Their shade of blue is peculiar, 
so dark   is almost black, with a small patch of lighter blue on the left iris, right next  the corner of 
his eye. 

“Catch on? Catch on  what? That  wanted  prove  Eric how tough  are? That you’re 
sadistic, just like   is?” 

“am not sadistic.” He doesn’t yell. wish   would yell.  would scare  less. He leans his face 
close  mine, which reminds  of lying inches away from the attack dog’s fangs in the aptitude test, 
 says, “ wanted  hurt ,   think would have already?” 

He crosses the room  slams the point of a knife so hard into the table that   sticks there, handle 
toward the ceiling. 

“I—” start  shout, but  ’s already gone. scream, frustrated,  wipe some of the blood from 
 ear. 

Today is the day before Visiting Day. think of Visiting Day like think of the world ending: 
Nothing after   matters. Everything do builds up   . might see  parents again. might not. 
Which is worse?  know. 

try  pull a pant leg over  thigh    sticks just above  knee. Frowning, stare at  leg. A 
bulge of muscle is stopping the fabric. let the pant leg fall  look over  shoulder at the back of 
 thigh. Another muscle stands out there. 

step  the side so stand in front of the mirror. see muscles that couldn’t see before in  
arms, legs,  stomach. pinch  side, where a layer of fat used  hint at curves  come. Nothing. 
Dauntless initiation has stolen whatever softness  body had. Is that good, or bad? 

At least am stronger than was. wrap  towel around  again  leave the girls’ bathroom. 
hope no one is in the dormitory  see  walking in  towel, but  ’t wear those pants. 

When open the dormitory door, a weight drops into  stomach. Peter, Molly, Drew,  some of 
the other initiates stand in the back corner, laughing. They look up when walk in  start snickering. 
Molly’s snort-laugh is louder than everyone else’s. 

walk   bunk, trying  pretend like they aren’t there,  fumble in the drawer under  bed 
for the dress Christina made  get. One hand clamped around the towel  one holding the dress, 
stand up,  right behind  is Peter. 

jump back, almost hitting  head on Christina’s bunk. try  slip past him, but   slams his 
hand against Christina’s bed frame, blocking  path. should have known   wouldn’t let  get 
away that easily. 

“Didn’t realize  were so skinny, Stiff.” 

“Get away from .” My voice is somehow steady. 

“This isn’t the Hub,  know. No one has  follow a Stiff’s orders here.” His eyes travel down  
body, not in the greedy   that a man looks at a woman, but cruelly, scrutinizing every flaw. hear 
 heartbeat in  ears as the others inch closer, forming a pack behind Peter. 

This will be bad. 

have  get out of here. 

Out of the corner of  eye, see a clear path  the door.   duck under Peter’s arm  sprint 
toward  , might be able  make  . 

“Look at her,” says Molly, crossing her arms. She smirks at . “She’s practically a child.” 

“Oh,  know,” says Drew. “She could be hiding something under that towel. Why  we 
look  see?” 

Now. duck under Peter’s arm  dart toward the door. Something pinches  pulls at  towel 
as walk away  then yanks sharply—Peter’s hand, gathering the fabric into his fist. The towel slips 
from  hand  the air is cold on  naked body, making the hair on the back of  neck stand on 
end. 

Laughter erupts,  run as fast as  toward the door, holding the dress against  body  
hide  . sprint down the hallway  into the bathroom  lean against the door, breathing hard. 
close  eyes. 

 doesn’t matter.  care. 


A sob bursts from  mouth,  slap  hand over  lips  contain  .  doesn’t matter what 
they saw. shake  head like the motion is supposed  make   true. 

With shaking hands, get dressed. The dress is plain black, with a V-neck that shows the tattoos on 
 collarbone,  goes down   knees. 

Once   dressed  the urge  cry is gone, feel something hot  violent writhing in  
stomach. want  hurt them. 

stare at  eyes in the mirror. want , so will. 

 ’t fight in a dress, so get myself some new clothes from the Pit before walk  the training 
room for  last fight. hope  ’s with Peter. 

“Hey, where were  this morning?” Christina asks when walk in. squint  see the blackboard 
across the room. The space next   name is blank—haven’t gotten an opponent yet. 

“got held up,” say. 

Four stands in front of the board  writes a name next  mine. Please let   be Peter, please, 
please.... 

“You okay, Tris? You look a little...,” says Al. 

“A little what?” 

Four moves away from the board. The name written next  mine is Molly. Not Peter, but good 
enough. 

“On edge,” says Al. 

My fight is last on the list, which means have  wait through three matches before face her. 
Edward  Peter fight second  last—good. Edward is the only one who  beat Peter. Christina 
will fight Al, which means that Al will lose quickly, like  ’s been doing all week. 

“Go easy on , okay?” Al asks Christina. 

“make no promises,” she replies. 

The first pair—Will  Myra—stand across from each other in the arena. For a second they both 
shuffle back  forth, one jerking an arm forward  then retracting  , the other kicking  
missing. Across the room, Four leans against the wall  yawns. 

stare at the board  try  predict the outcome of each match.  doesn’t take long. Then bite 
 fingernails  think about Molly. Christina lost  her, which means she’s good. She has a 
powerful punch, but she doesn’t move her feet.  she  ’t hit , she  ’t hurt . 

As expected, the next fight between Christina  Al is quick  painless. Al falls after a few hard 
hits  the face  doesn’t get back up, which makes Eric shake his head. 

Edward  Peter take longer. Though they are the two best fighters, the disparity between them is 
noticeable. Edward’s fist slams into Peter’s jaw,  remember what Will said about him—that   
has been studying combat since   was ten. ’s obvious. He is faster  smarter than even Peter. 

By the time the three matches are done,  nails are bitten  the beds    hungry for lunch. 
walk  the arena without looking at anyone or anything but the center of the room. Some of  anger 
has faded, but   isn’t hard  call back. All have  do is think about how cold the air was  how 
loud the laughter was. Look at her. She’s a child. 

Molly stands across from . 

“Was that a birthmark saw on your left butt cheek?” she says, smirking. “God, you’re pale, Stiff.” 

She’ll make the first move. She always does. 



Molly starts toward   throws her weight into a punch. As her body shifts forward, duck  
drive  fist into her stomach, right over her bellybutton. Before she  get her hands on , slip 
past her,  hands up, ready for her next attempt. 

She’s not smirking anymore. She runs at  like she’s about  tackle ,  dart out of the  . 
hear Four’s voice in  head, telling  that the most powerful weapon at  disposal is  elbow. 
just have  find a    use  . 

block her next punch with  forearm. The blow stings, but barely notice  . She grits her teeth 
 lets out a frustrated groan, more animal-sounding than human. She tries a sloppy kick at  side, 
which dodge,  while her balance is off, rush forward  force  elbow up at her face. She 
pulls her head back just in time,   elbow grazes her chin. 

She punches  in the ribs  stumble  the side, recovering  breath. There’s something she’s 
not protecting, know  . want  hit her face, but maybe that’s not a smart move. watch her for a 
few seconds. Her hands are too high; they guard her nose  cheeks, leaving her stomach  ribs 
exposed. Molly  have the same flaw in combat. 

Our eyes meet for just a second. 

aim an uppercut low, below her bellybutton. My fist sinks into her flesh, forcing a heavy breath 
from her mouth that feel against  ear. As she gasps, sweep-kick her legs out from under her,  
she falls hard on the ground, sending dust into the air. pull  foot back  kick as hard as  at 
her ribs. 

My mother  father would not approve of  kicking someone when she’s down. 

 care. 

She curls into a ball  protect her side,  kick again, this time hitting her in the stomach. Like a 
child. kick again, this time hitting her in the face. Blood springs from her nose  spreads over her 
face. Look at her. Another kick hits her in the chest. 

pull  foot back again, but Four’s hands clamp around  arms,    pulls  away from her 
with irresistible force. breathe through gritted teeth, staring at Molly’s blood-covered face, the color 
deep  rich  beautiful, in a  . 

She groans,  hear a gurgling in her throat, watch blood trickle from her lips. 

“You won,” Four mutters. “Stop.” 

wipe the sweat from  forehead. He stares at . His eyes are too wide; they look alarmed. 

“think  should leave,”   says. “Take a walk.” 

“  fine,” say. “  fine now,” say again, this time for myself. 

wish could say felt guilty for what did. 

. 

Visiting Day. The second open  eyes, remember. My heart leaps  then plummets when see 
Molly hobble across the dormitory, her nose purple between strips of medical tape. Once see her 
leave, check for Peter  Drew. Neither of them is in the dormitory, so change quickly. As long as 
they aren’t here,  care who sees  in  underwear, not anymore. 

Everyone else dresses in silence. Not even Christina smiles. We all know that we might go  the Pit 
floor  search every face  never find one that belongs   . 

make  bed with the tight corners like  father taught . As pinch a stray hair from  
pillow, Eric walks in. 

“Attention!”   announces, flicking a lock of dark hair from his eyes. “want  give  some 
advice about today.  by some miracle your families do come  visit ...” He scans our faces  
smirks, “...which doubt,   is best not  seem too attached. That will make   easier for ,  
easier for them. We also take the phrase ‘faction before blood’ very seriously here. Attachment  
your family suggests  aren’t entirely pleased with your faction, which would be shameful. 
Understand?” 

understand. hear the threat in Eric’s sharp voice. The only part of that speech that Eric meant was 
the last part: We are Dauntless,  we need  act accordingly. 

On    out of the dormitory, Eric stops . 

“may have underestimated , Stiff,”   says. “You did well yesterday.” 

stare up at him. For the first time since beat Molly, guilt pinches  gut. 

 Eric thinks did something right, must have done   wrong. 

“Thank ,” say. slip out of the dormitory. 

Once  eyes adjust  the dim hallway light, see Christina  Will ahead of , Will laughing, 
probably at a joke Christina made.  try  catch up. For some reason, feel like   would be a 
mistake  interrupt them. 

A1 is missing. didn’t see him in the dormitory,   ’s not walking toward the Pit now. Maybe 
 ’s already there. 

run  fingers through  hair  smooth   into a bun. check  clothes—am covered up? 
My pants are tight   collarbone is showing. They won’t approve. 

Who cares if they approve? set  jaw. This is  faction now. These are the clothes  faction 
wears. stop just before the hallway ends. 

Clusters of families stand on the Pit floor, most of them Dauntless families with Dauntless initiates. 
They still look strange  me—a mother with a pierced eyebrow, a father with a tattooed arm, an 
initiate with purple hair, a wholesome family unit. spot Drew  Molly standing alone at one end of 
the room  suppress a smile. At least their families didn’t come. 

But Peter’s did. He stands next  a tall man with bushy eyebrows  a short, meek-looking woman 
with red hair. Neither of his parents looks like him. They both wear black pants  white shirts, 
typical Candor outfits,  his father speaks so loudly  almost hear him from where stand. Do 
they know what kind of person their son is? 

Then again.. .what kind of person am ? 

Across the room, Will stands with a woman in a blue dress. She doesn’t look old enough  be his 


mother, but she has the same crease between her eyebrows as   does,  the same golden hair. He 
talked about having a sister once; maybe that’s her. 

Next  him, Christina hugs a dark-skinned woman in Candor black  white. Standing behind 
Christina is a young girl, also a Candor. Her younger sister. 

Should even bother scanning the crowd for  parents? could turn around  go back  the 
dormitory. 

Then see her. My mother stands alone near the railing with her hands clasped in front of her. She 
has never looked more out of place, with her gray slacks  gray jacket buttoned at the throat, her 
hair in its simple twist  her face placid. start toward her, tears jumping into  eyes. She came. 
She came for . 

walk faster. She sees ,  for a second her expression is blank, like she doesn’t know who 
am. Then her eyes light up,  she opens her arms. She smells like soap  laundry detergent. 

“Beatrice,” she whispers. She runs her hand over  hair. 

Don’t cry, tell myself. hold her until  blink the moisture from  eyes,  then pull back  
look at her again. smile with closed lips, just like she does. She touches  cheek. 

“Well, look at ,” she says. “You’ve filled out.” She puts her arm across  shoulders. “Tell  
how  are.” 

“You first.” The old habits are back. should let her speak first. shouldn’t let the conversation stay 
focused on  for too long. should make sure she doesn’t need anything. 

“Today is a special occasion,” she says. “came  see , so let’s talk mostly about .  is  
gift  .” 

My selfless mother. She should not be giving  gifts, not after left her   father. walk with 
her toward the railing that overlooks the chasm, glad  be close  her. The last week  a half has 
been more affectionless than realized. At home we did not touch each other often,  the most 
ever saw  parents do was hold hands at the dinner table, but   was more than this, more than here. 

“Just one question.” feel  pulse in  throat. “Where’s Dad? Is   visiting Caleb?” 

“Ah.” She shakes her head. “Your father had  be at work.” 

look down. “You  tell  if   didn’t want  come.” 

Her eyes travel over  face. “Your father has been selfish lately. That doesn’t mean   doesn’t 
love , promise.” 

stare at her, stunned. My father—selfish? More startling than the label is the fact that she assigned 
   him.  ’t tell by looking at her if she’s angry.  expect  be able . But she must be; if 
she calls him selfish, she must be angry. 

“What about Caleb?” say. “Will  visit him later?” 

“wish could,” she says, “but the Erudite have prohibited Abnegation visitors from entering their 
compound.  tried, would be removed from the premises.” 

“What?” demand. “That’s terrible. Why would they do that?” 

“Tensions between our factions are higher than ever,” she says. “wish   wasn’t that  , but there 
is little  do about  .” 

think of Caleb standing among the Erudite initiates, scanning the crowd for our mother,  feel a 
pang in  stomach. Part of  is still angry with him for keeping so many secrets from , but 
 want him  hurt. 

“That’s terrible,” repeat. look toward the chasm. 



Standing alone at the railing is Four. Though  ’s not an initiate anymore, most of the Dauntless use 
this day  come together with their families. Either his family doesn’t like  come together, or   
wasn’t originally Dauntless. Which faction could   have come from? 

“There’s one of  instructors.” lean closer  her  say, “He’s kind of intimidating.” 

“He’s handsome,” she says. 

find myself nodding without thinking. She laughs  lifts her arm from  shoulders. want  
steer her away from him, but just as   about  suggest that we go somewhere else,   looks over his 
shoulder. 

His eyes widen at the sight of  mother. She offers him her hand. 

“Hello. My name is Natalie,” she says. “  Beatrice’s mother.” 

have never seen  mother shake hands with someone. Four eases his hand into hers, looking 
stiff,  shakes   twice. The gesture looks unnatural for both of them. No, Four was not originally 
Dauntless if   doesn’t shake hands easily. 

“Four,”   says. “’s nice  meet .” 

“Four,”  mother repeats, smiling. “Is that a nickname?” 

“Yes.” He doesn’t elaborate. What is his real name? “Your daughter is doing well here. I’ve been 
overseeing her training.” 

Since when does “overseeing” include throwing knives at   scolding  at every opportunity? 

“That’s good  hear,” she says. “know a few things about Dauntless initiation,  was worried 
about her.” 

He looks at ,  his eyes move down  face, from nose  mouth  chin. Then   says, “You 
shouldn’t worry.” 

 ’t keep the heat from rushing into  cheeks. hope   isn’t noticeable. 

Is   just reassuring her because she’s  mother, or does   really believe that am capable? And 
what did that look mean? 

She tilts her head. “You look familiar for some reason, Four.” 

“ ’t imagine why,”   replies, his voice suddenly cold. “ make a habit of associating with 
the Abnegation.” 

My mother laughs. She has a light laugh, half air  half sound. “Few people do, these days. 
 take   personally.” 

He seems  relax a little. “Well, I’ll leave   your reunion.” 

My mother  watch him leave. The roar of the river fills  ears. Maybe Four was one of the 
Erudite, which explains why   hates Abnegation. Or maybe   believes the articles the Erudite 
release about  — them, remind myself. But   was kind of him  tell her that   doing well when 
know   doesn’t believe  . 

“Is   always like that?” she says. 

“Worse.” 

“Have  made friends?” she asks. 

“A few,” say. look over  shoulder at Will  Christina  their families. When Christina 
catches  eye, she beckons  , smiling, so  mother  cross the Pit floor. 

Before we  get  Will  Christina, though, a short, round woman with a black--white- 
striped shirt touches  arm. twitch, resisting the urge  smack her hand away. 

“Excuse ,” she says. “Do  know  son? Albert?” 



“Albert?” repeat. “Oh—you mean Al? Yes, know him.” 

“Do  know where we  find him?” she says, gesturing  a man behind her. He is tall  as 
thick as a boulder. ATs father, obviously. 

“  sorry, didn’t see him this morning. Maybe  should look for him up there?” point at the 
glass ceiling above  . 

“Oh ,” Al’s mother says, fanning her face with her hand. “would rather not attempt that climb 
again. almost had a panic attack on the   down here. Why aren’t there any railings along those 
paths? Are  all insane?” 

smile a little. A few weeks ago might have found that question offensive, but now spend too 
much time with Candor transfers  be surprised by tactlessness. 

“Insane, no,” say. “Dauntless, yes.  see him, I’ll tell him you’re looking for him.” 

My mother, see, wears the same smile do. She isn’t reacting the   some of the other transfers’ 
parents are—her neck bent, looking around at the Pit walls, at the Pit ceiling, at the chasm. Of course 
she isn’t curious—she’s Abnegation. Curiosity is foreign  her. 

introduce  mother  Will  Christina,  Christina introduces   her mother  her 
sister. But when Will introduces   Cara, his older sister, she gives  the kind of look that would 
wither a plant  does not extend her hand for   shake. She glares at  mother. 

“ ’t believe that  associate with one of them, Will,” she says. 

My mother purses her lips, but of course, doesn’t say anything. 

“Cara,” says Will, frowning, “there’s no need  be rude.” 

“Oh, certainly not. Do  know what she is?” She points at  mother. “She’s a council member’s 
wife is what she is. She runs the 'volunteer agency’ that supposedly helps the factionless. You think 
 know that you’re just hoarding goods  distribute  your own faction while we  get fresh 
food for a month, huh? Food for the factionless,  eye.” 

“  sorry,”  mother says gently. “believe  are mistaken.” 

“Mistaken. Ha,” Cara snaps. “  sure you’re exactly what  seem. A faction of happy-go-lucky 
do-gooders without a selfish bone in their bodies. Right.” 

“Don’t speak   mother that  ,” say,  face hot. clench  hands into fists. “Don’t say 
another word  her or swear will break your nose.” 

“Back off, Tris,” Will says. “You’re not going  punch  sister.” 

“Oh?” say, raising both eyebrows. “You think so?” 

“No, you’re not.” My mother touches  shoulder. “Come on, Beatrice. We wouldn’t want  
bother your friend’s sister.” 

She sounds gentle, but her hand squeezes  arm so hard almost cry out from the pain as she 
drags  away. She walks with , fast, toward the dining hall. Just before she reaches  , though, she 
takes a sharp left turn  walks down one of the dark hallways haven’t explored yet. 

“Mom,” say. “Mom, how do  know where you’re going?” 

She stops next  a locked door  stands on her tiptoes, peering at the base of the blue lamp 
hanging from the ceiling. A few seconds later she nods  turns   again. 

“said no questions about . And meant  . How are  really doing, Beatrice? How have the 
fights been? How are  ranked?” 

“Ranked?” say. “You know that I’ve been fighting? You know that   ranked?” 

“ isn’t top-secret information, how the Dauntless initiation process works.” 



 know how easy   is  find out what another faction does during initiation, but suspect  ’s 
not that easy. Slowly, say, “  close  the bottom, Mom.” 

“Good.” She nods. “No one looks too closely at the bottom. Now, this is very important, Beatrice: 
What were your aptitude test results?” 

Tori’s warning pulses in  head. Don’t tell anyone. should tell her that  result was 
Abnegation, because that’s what Tori recorded in the system. 

look into  mother’s eyes, which are pale green  framed by a dark smudge of eyelashes. She 
has lines around her mouth, but other than that, she doesn’t look her age. Those lines get deeper when 
she hums. She used  hum as she washed the dishes. 

This is  mother. 

 trust her. 

“They were inconclusive,” say softly. 

“thought as much.” She sighs. “Many children who are raised Abnegation receive that kind of 
result. We  know why. But  have  be very careful during the next stage of initiation, 
Beatrice. Stay in the middle of the pack, no matter what  do. Don’t draw attention  yourself. Do 
 understand?” 

“Mom, what’s going on?” 

“ care what faction  chose,” she says, touching her hands   cheeks. “am your 
mother  want  keep  safe.” 

“Is this because   a—” start  say, but she presses her hand   mouth. 

“Don’t say that word,” she hisses. “Ever.” 

So Tori was right. Divergent is a dangerous thing  be. just  know why, or even what   really 
means, still. 

“Why?” 

She shakes her head. “ ’t say.” 

She looks over her shoulder, where the light from the Pit floor is barely visible. hear shouts  
conversations, laughter  shuffling footsteps. The smell from the dining hall floats over  nose, 
sweet  yeasty: baking bread. When she turns toward , her jaw is set. 

“There’s something want   do,” she says. “ ’t go visit your brother, but  , when 
initiation is over. So want   go find him  tell him  research the simulation serum. Okay? 
Can  do that for ?” 

“Not unless  explain some of this  , Mom!” cross  arms. “You want   go hang out 
at the Erudite compound for the day,  had better give  a reason!” 

“ ’t.   sorry.” She kisses  cheek  brushes a lock of hair that fell from  bun behind 
 ear. “should leave.  will make  look better if    seem attached  each other.” 

“ care how look  them,” say. 

“You should,” she says. “suspect they are already monitoring .” 

She walks away,  am too stunned  follow her. At the end of the hallway she turns  says, 
“Have a piece of cake for , all right? The chocolate. ’s delicious.” She smiles a strange, twisted 
smile,  adds, “love ,  know.” 

And then she’s gone. 

stand alone in the blue light coming from the lamp above ,  understand: 

She has been  the compound before. She remembered this hallway. She knows about the initiation 



process. 

My mother was Dauntless. 

That afternoon, go back  the dormitory while everyone else spends time with their families  
find A1 sitting on his bed, staring at the space on the wall where the chalkboard usually is. Four took   
down yesterday so   could calculate our stage one rankings. 

“There  are!” say. “Your parents were looking for . Did they find ?” 

He shakes his head. 

sit down next  him on the bed. My leg is barely half the width of his, even now that  ’s more 
muscular than   was. He wears black shorts. His knee is purple-blue with a bruise  crossed with a 
scar. 

“You didn’t want  see them?” say. 

“Didn’t want them  ask how was doing,”   says. “I’d have  tell them,  they would know if 
was lying.” 

“Well...” struggle  come up with something  say. “What’s wrong with how you’re doing?” 

A1 laughs harshly. “I’ve lost every fight since the one with Will.   not doing well.” 

“By choice, though. Couldn’t  tell them that, too?” 

He shakes his head. “Dad always wanted   come here. mean, they said they wanted   stay 
in Candor, but that’s only because that’s what they’re supposed  say. They’ve always admired the 
Dauntless, both of them. They wouldn’t understand if tried  explain    them.” 

“Oh.” tap  fingers against  knee. Then look at him. “Is that why  chose Dauntless? 
Because of your parents?” 

A1 shakes his head. “No. guess   was because...think  ’s important  protect people. To stand 
up for people. Like  did for .” He smiles at . “That’s what the Dauntless are supposed  do, 
right? That’s what courage is. Not...hurting people for no reason.” 

remember what Four told , that teamwork used  be a Dauntless priority. What were the 
Dauntless like when   was? What would have learned if had been here when  mother was 
Dauntless? Maybe wouldn’t have broken Molly’s nose. Or threatened Will’s sister. 

feel a pang of guilt. “Maybe   will be better once initiation is over.” 

“Too bad might come in last,” A1 says. “guess we’ll see tonight.” 

We sit side-by-side for a while. ’s better  be here, in silence, than in the Pit, watching everyone 
laugh with their families. 

My father used  say that sometimes, the best    help someone is just  be near them. feel 
good when do something know   would be proud of, like   makes up for all the things I’ve done 
that   wouldn’t be proud of. 

“feel braver when   around ,  know,”   says. “Like could actually fit in here, the same 
   do.” 

am about  respond when   slides his arm across  shoulders. Suddenly freeze,  cheeks 
hot. 

didn’t want  be right about Al’s feelings for . But was. 

do not lean into him. Instead sit forward so his arm falls away. Then squeeze  hands together 
in  lap. 

“Tris, ...,”   says. His voice sounds strained. glance at him. His face is as red as mine feels, but 


 ’s not crying—  just looks embarrassed. 

“Um...sorry,”   says. “wasn’t trying ...um. Sorry.” 

wish could tell him not  take   personally. could tell him that  parents rarely held hands 
even in our own home, so have trained myself  pull away from all gestures of affection, because 
they raised   take them seriously. Maybe if told him that, there wouldn’t be a layer of hurt 
beneath his flush of embarrassment. 

But of course,   is personal. He is  friend—and that is all. What is more personal than that? 

breathe in,  when breathe out, make myself smile. “Sorry about what?” ask, trying  
sound casual. brush off  jeans, though there isn’t anything on them,  stand up. 

“should go,” say. 

He nods  doesn’t look at . 

“You going  be okay?” say. “mean...because of your parents. Not because...” let  voice 
trail off.  know what would say if didn’t. 

“Oh. Yeah.” He nods again, a little too vigorously. “I’ll see  later, Tris.” 

try not  walk out of the room too fast. When the dormitory door closes behind , touch a hand 
  forehead  grin a little. Awkwardness aside,   is nice  be liked. 

Discussing our family visits would be too painful, so our final rankings for stage one are all anyone 
 talk about that night. Every time someone near  brings   up, stare at some point across the 
room  ignore them. 

My rank  ’t be as bad as   used  be, especially after beat Molly, but   might not be good 
enough  get  in the top ten at the end of initiation, especially when the Dauntless-born initiates 
are factored in. 

At dinner sit with Christina, Will,  A1 at a table in the corner. We are uncomfortably close  
Peter, Drew,  Molly, who are at the next table over. When conversation at our table reaches a lull, 
hear every word they say. They are speculating about the ranks. What a surprise. 

“You weren’t allowed  have pets?” Christina demands, smacking the table with her palm. “Why 
not?” 

“Because they’re illogical,” Will says matter-of-factly. “What is the point in providing food  
shelter for an animal that just soils your furniture, makes your home smell bad,  ultimately dies?” 

A1  meet eyes, like we usually do when Will  Christina start  fight. But this time, the 
second our eyes meet, we both look away. hope this awkwardness between   doesn’t last long. 
want  friend back. 

“The point is...” Christina’s voice trails off,  she tilts her head. “Well, they’re fun  have. had 
a bulldog named Chunker. One time we left a whole roasted chicken on the counter  cool,  while 
 mother went  the bathroom,   pulled   down off the counter  ate  , bones  skin  all. 
We laughed so hard.” 

“Yes, that certainly changes  mind. Of course want  live with an animal that eats all  food 
 destroys  kitchen.” Will shakes his head. “Why   just get a dog after initiation if 
you’re feeling that nostalgic?” 

“Because.” Christina’s smile falls,  she pokes at her potato with her fork. “Dogs are sort of 
ruined for . After... know, after the aptitude test.” 

We exchange looks. We all know that we aren’t supposed  talk about the test, not even now that 
we have chosen, but for them that rule must not be as serious as   is for . My heart jumps 



unsteadily in  chest. For  that rule is protection.  keeps  from having  lie   friends 
about  results. Every time think the word “Divergent,” hear Tori’s warning—and now  
mother’s warning too. Don’t tell anyone. Dangerous. 

“You mean...killing the dog, right?” asks Will. 

almost forgot. Those with an aptitude for Dauntless picked up the knife in the simulation  
stabbed the dog when   attacked. No wonder Christina doesn’t want a pet dog anymore. tug  
sleeves over  wrists  twist  fingers together. 

“Yeah,” she says. “mean,  guys all had  do that too, right?” 

She looks first at Al,  then at . Her dark eyes narrow,  she says, “You didn’t.” 

“Hmm?” 

“You’re hiding something,” she says. “You’re fidgeting.” 

“What?” 

“In Candor,” says Al, nudging  with his shoulder. There. That feels normal. “We learn  read 
body language so we know when someone is lying or keeping something from  .” 

“Oh.” scratch the back of  neck. “Well...” 

“See, there   is again!” she says, pointing at  hand. 

feel like   swallowing  heartbeat. How  lie about  results if they  tell when   
lying? I’ll have  control  body language. drop  hand  clasp  hands in  lap. Is that 
what an honest person does? 

 have  lie about the dog, at least. “No, didn’t kill the dog.” 

“How did  get Dauntless without using the knife?” says Will, narrowing his eyes at . 

look him in the eye  say evenly, “didn’t. got Abnegation.” 

 is half-true. Tori reported  result as Abnegation, so that is what is in the system. Anyone who 
has access  the scores would be able  see  . keep  eyes on his for a few seconds. Shifting them 
away might be suspicious. Then shrug  stab a piece of meat with  fork. hope they believe . 
They have  believe . 

“But  chose Dauntless anyway?” Christina says. “Why?” 

“told ,” say, smirking. “ was the food.” 

She laughs. “Did  guys know that Tris had never seen a hamburger before she came here?” 

She launches into the story of our first day,   body relaxes, but still feel heavy. should not 
lie   friends.  creates barriers between  ,  we already have more than want. Christina 
taking the flag. Me rejecting Al. 

After dinner we go back  the dormitory,   ’s hard for  not  sprint, knowing that the 
rankings will be up when get there. want  get   over with. At the door  the dormitory, Drew 
shoves  into the wall  get past . My shoulder scrapes on the stone, but keep walking. 

  too short  see over the crowd of initiates standing near the back of the room, but when find a 
space between heads  look through, see that the blackboard is on the ground, leaning against Four’s 
legs, facing away from  . He stands with a piece of chalk in one hand. 

“For those of  who just came in,   explaining how the ranks are determined,”   says. “After 
the first round of fights, we ranked  according  your skill level. The number of points  earn 
depends on your skill level  the skill level of the person  beat. You earn more points for 
improving  more points for beating someone of a high skill level.  reward preying on the 
weak. That is cowardice.” 



think his eyes linger on Peter at that last line, but they move on quickly enough that   not sure. 
“  have a high rank,  lose points for losing  a low-ranked opponent.” 

Molly lets out an unpleasant noise, like a snort or a grumble. 

“Stage two of training is weighted more heavily than stage one, because   is more closely tied  
overcoming cowardice,”   says. “That said,   is extremely difficult  rank high at the end of 
initiation if  rank low in stage one.” 

shift from one foot  the other, trying  get a good look at him. When finally do, look away. 
His eyes are already on , probably drawn by  nervous movement. 

“We will announce the cuts tomorrow,” Four says. “The fact that  are transfers  the 
Dauntless-born initiates are not will not be taken into consideration. Four of  could be factionless 
 none of them. Or four of them could be factionless  none of . Or any combination thereof. 
That said, here are your ranks.” 

He hangs the board on the hook  steps back so we  see the rankings: 


1. Edward 

2. Peter 

3. Will 

4. Christina 

5. Molly 

6. Tris 


Sixth?  ’t be sixth. Beating Molly must have boosted  rank more than thought   would. 
And losing   seems  have lowered hers. skip  the bottom of the list. 


7. Drew 

8. A1 

9. Myra 


A1 isn’t dead last, but unless the Dauntless-born initiates completely failed their version of stage 
one of initiation,   is factionless. 

glance at Christina. She tilts her head  frowns at the board. She isn’t the only one. The quiet in 
the room is uneasy, like   is rocking back  forth on a ledge. 

Then   falls. 

“What?” demands Molly. She points at Christina. “beat her! beat her in minutes,  she’s 
ranked above ?” 

“Yeah,” says Christina, crossing her arms. She wears a smug smile. “And?” 

“  intend  secure yourself a high rank, suggest   make a habit of losing  low- 
ranked opponents,” says Four, his voice cutting through the mutters  grumbles of the other 
initiates. He pockets the chalk  walks past  without glancing in  direction. The words sting a 
little, reminding  that am the low-ranked opponent  ’s referring . 

Apparently they remind Molly, too. 



“You,” she says, focusing her narrowed eyes on . “You are going  pay for this.” 

expect her  lunge at , or hit , but she just turns on her heel  stalks out of the dormitory, 
 that is worse.  she had exploded, her anger would have been spent quickly, after a punch or two. 
Leaving means she wants  plan something. Leaving means have  be on  guard. 

Peter didn’t say anything when the rankings went up, which, given his tendency  complain about 
anything that doesn’t go his  , is surprising. He just walks  his bunk  sits down, untying his 
shoelaces. That makes  feel even more uneasy. He  ’t possibly be satisfied with second place. 
Not Peter. 

Will  Christina slap hands,  then Will claps  on the back with a hand bigger than  
shoulder blade. 

“Look at . Number six,”   says, grinning. 

“Still might not have been good enough,” remind him. 

“ will be,  worry,”   says. “We should celebrate.” 

“Well, let’s go, then,” says Christina, grabbing  arm with one hand  Al’s arm with the other. 
“Come on, Al. You  know how the Dauntless-borns did. You  know anything for sure.” 

“  just going  go  bed,”   mumbles, pulling his arm free. 

In the hallway,   is easy  forget about Al  Molly’s revenge  Peter’s suspicious calm,  
easy  pretend that what separates   as friends does not exist. But lingering at the back of  mind 
is the fact that Christina  Will are  competitors.  want  fight     the top ten, will 
have  beat them first. 

just hope  have  betray them in the process. 

That night have trouble falling asleep. The dormitory used  seem loud  , with all the breathing, 
but now   is too quiet. When  ’s quiet, think about  family. Thank God the Dauntless compound 
is usually loud. 

  mother was Dauntless, why did she choose Abnegation? Did she love its peace, its routine, its 
goodness—all the things miss, when let myself think about  ? 

wonder if someone here knew her when she was young  could tell  what she was like then. 
Even if they did, they probably wouldn’t want  discuss her. Faction transfers are not really supposed 
 discuss their old factions once they become members. ’s supposed  make   easier for them  
change their allegiance from family  faction—to embrace the principle “faction before blood.” 

bury  face in the pillow. She asked   tell Caleb  research the simulation serum—why? 
Does   have something  do with  being Divergent, with  being in danger, or is   something 
else? sigh. have a thousand questions,  she left before could ask any of them. Now they swirl 
in  head,  doubt I’ll be able  sleep until  answer them. 

hear a scuffle across the room  lift  head from the pillow. My eyes aren’t adjusted  the 
dark, so stare into pure black, like the backs of  eyelids. hear shuffling  the squeak of a shoe. 
A heavy thud. 

And then a wail that curdles  blood  makes  hair stand on end. throw the blankets back 
 stand on the stone floor with bare feet. still  ’t see well enough  find the source of the 
scream, but see a dark lump on the floor a few bunks down. Another scream pierces  ears. 

“Turn on the lights!” someone shouts. 

walk toward the sound, slowly so  trip over anything. feel like   in a trance.  want 
 see where the screaming is coming from. A scream like that  only mean blood  bone  



pain; that scream that comes from the pit of the stomach  extends  every inch of the body. 

The lights come on. 

Edward lies on the floor next  his bed, clutching at his face. Surrounding his head is a halo of 
blood,  jutting between his clawing fingers is a silver knife handle. My heart thumping in  ears, 
recognize   as a butter knife from the dining hall. The blade is stuck in Edward’s eye. 

Myra, who stands at Edward’s feet, screams. Someone else screams too,  someone yells for help, 
 Edward is still on the floor, writhing  wailing. crouch by his head,  knees pressing  the 
pool of blood,  put  hands on his shoulders. 

“Lie still,” say. feel calm, though  ’t hear anything, like  head is submerged in water. 
Edward thrashes again  say   louder, sterner. “said, lie still. Breathe.” 

“My eye!”   screams. 

smell something foul. Someone vomited. 

“Take   out!”   yells. “Get   out, get   out of , get   out!” 

shake  head  then realize that    ’t see . A laugh bubbles in  stomach. Hysterical. 
have  suppress hysteria if   going  help him. have  forget myself. 

“No,” say. “You have  let the doctor take   out. Hear ? Let the doctor take   out. And 
breathe.” 

“ hurts,”   sobs. 

“know   does.” Instead of  voice hear  mother’s voice. see her crouching before  on 
the sidewalk in front of our house, brushing tears from  face after scraped  knee. was five at 
the time. 

“ will be all right.” try  sound firm, like   not idly reassuring him, but am.  know if 
  will be all right. suspect that   won’t. 

When the nurse arrives, she tells   step back,  do. My hands  knees are soaked with 
blood. When look around, see that only two faces are missing. 

Drew. 

And Peter. 

After they take Edward away, carry a change of clothes into the bathroom  wash  hands. 
Christina comes with   stands by the door, but she doesn’t say anything,    glad. There 
isn’t much  say. 

scrub at the lines in  palms  run one fingernail under  other fingernails  get the blood 
out. change into the pants brought  throw the soiled ones in the trash. get as many paper towels 
as  hold. Someone needs  clean up the mess in the dormitory,  since doubt I’ll ever be able 
 sleep again,   might as well be . 

As reach for the door handle, Christina says, “You know who did that, right?” 

“Yeah.” 

“Should we tell someone?” 

“You really think the Dauntless will do anything?” say. “After they hung  over the chasm? 
After they made   beat each other unconscious?” 

She doesn’t say anything. 

For a half hour after that, kneel alone on the floor in the dormitory  scrub at Edward’s blood. 
Christina throws away the dirty paper towels  gets  new ones. Myra is gone; she probably 
followed Edward  the hospital. 



No one sleeps much that night. 


“This is going  sound weird,” Will says, “but wish we didn’t have a day off today.” 

nod. know what   means. Having something  do would distract ,  could use a 
distraction right now. 

have not spent much time alone with Will, but Christina  A1 are taking naps in the dormitory, 
 neither of   wanted  be in that room longer than we had . Will didn’t tell  that; just know. 

slide one fingernail under another. washed  hands thoroughly after cleaning up Edward’s 
blood, but still feel like  ’s on  hands. Will  walk with no sense of purpose. There is nowhere 
 go. 

“We could visit him,” suggests Will. “But what would we say? ‘didn’t know  that well, but   
sorry  got stabbed in the eye’?” 

 isn’t funny. know that as soon as   says  , but a laugh rises in  throat anyway,  let   
out because  ’s harder  keep   in. Will stares at  for a second,  then   laughs too. Sometimes 
crying or laughing are the only options left,  laughing feels better right now. 

“Sorry,” say. “’s just so ridiculous.” 

 want  cry for Edward—at least not in the deep, personal   that  cry for a friend or 
loved one. want  cry because something terrible happened,  saw  ,  could not see a   
 mend  . No one who would want  punish Peter has the authority ,  no one who has the 
authority  punish him would want . The Dauntless have rules against attacking someone like that, 
but with people like Eric in charge, suspect those rules go unenforced. 

say, more seriously, “The most ridiculous part is, in any other faction   would be brave of    
tell someone what happened. But here...in Dauntless.. .bravery won’t do   any good.” 

“Have  ever read the faction manifestos?” says Will. 

The faction manifestos were written after the factions formed. We learned about them in school, but 
never read them. 

“You have?” frown at him. Then remember that Will once memorized a map of the city for fun, 
 say, “Oh. Of course  have. Never mind.” 

“One of the lines remember from the Dauntless manifesto is, 'We believe in ordinary acts of 
bravery, in the courage that drives one person  stand up for another.’” 

Will sighs. 

He doesn’t need  say anything else. know what   means. Maybe Dauntless was formed with 
good intentions, with the right ideals  the right goals. But   has strayed far from them. And the 
same is true of Erudite, realize. A long time ago, Erudite pursued knowledge  ingenuity for the 
sake of doing good. Now they pursue knowledge  ingenuity with greedy hearts. wonder if the 
other factions suffer from the same problem. have not thought about   before. 

Despite the depravity see in Dauntless, though, could not leave  .  isn’t only because the 
thought of living factionless, in complete isolation, sounds like a fate worse than death.  is because, 
in the brief moments that have loved   here, saw a faction worth saving. Maybe we  become 
brave  honorable again. 

“Let’s go  the cafeteria,” Will says, “and eat cake.” 

“Okay.” smile. 

As we walk toward the Pit, repeat the line Will quoted  myself so  forget  . 

believe in ordinary acts of bravery, in the courage that drives one person  stand up for another. 



 is a beautiful thought. 


Later, when return  the dormitory, Edward’s bunk is stripped clean  his drawers are open, 
empty. Across the room, Myra’s bunk looks the same  . 

When ask Christina where they went, she says, “They quit.” 

“Even Myra?” 

“She said she didn’t want  be here without him. She was going  get cut anyway.” She shrugs, 
like she  ’t think of anything else  do.  that’s true, know how she feels. “At least they didn’t cut 
Al.” 

A1 was supposed  get cut, but Edward’s departure saved him. The Dauntless decided  spare him 
until the next stage. 

“Who else got cut?” say. 

Christina shrugs again. “Two of the Dauntless-born.  remember their names.” 

nod  look at the blackboard. Someone drew a line through Edward  Myra’s names,  
changed the numbers next  everyone else’s names. Now Peter is first. Will is second. am fifth. We 
started stage one with nine initiates. 

Now we have seven. 

’s noon. Lunchtime. 

sit in a hallway  recognize. walked here because needed  get away from the dormitory. 
Maybe if bring  bedding here, will never have  go  the dormitory again.  may be  
imagination, but   still smells like blood in there, even though scrubbed the floor until  hands 
were sore,  someone poured bleach on   this morning. 

pinch the bridge of  nose. Scrubbing the floor when no one else wanted  was something that 
 mother would have done.   ’t be with her, the least  do is act like her sometimes. 

hear people approaching, their footsteps echoing on the stone floor,  look down at  shoes. 
switched from gray sneakers  black sneakers a week ago, but the gray shoes are buried in one of  
drawers.  ’t bear  throw them away, even though know  ’s foolish  be attached  sneakers, 
like they  bring  home. 

“Tris?” 

look up. Uriah stops in front of . He waves along the Dauntless-born initiates   walks with. 
They exchange looks but keep moving. 

“You okay?”   says. 

“had a difficult night.” 

“Yeah, heard about that guy Edward.” Uriah looks down the hallway. The Dauntless-born initiates 
disappear around a corner. Then   grins a little. “Want  get out of here?” 

“What?” ask. “Where are  going?” 

“To a little initiation ritual,”   says. “Come on. We have  hurry.” 

briefly consider  options.  sit here. Or  leave the Dauntless compound. 

push myself   feet  jog next  Uriah  catch up  the Dauntless-born initiates. 

“The only initiates they usually let come are ones with older siblings in Dauntless,”   says. “But 
they might not even notice. Just act like  belong.” 

“What exactly are we doing?” 

“Something dangerous,”   says. A look  only describe as Dauntless mania enters his eyes, but 
rather than recoil from  , as might have a few weeks ago, catch  , like  ’s contagious. Excitement 
replaces the leaden feeling inside . We slow when we reach the Dauntless-born initiates. 

“What’s the Stiff doing here?” asks a boy with a metal ring between his nostrils. 

“She just saw that guy get stabbed in the eye, Gabe,” says Uriah. “Give her a break, okay?” 

Gabe shrugs  turns away. No one else says anything, though a few of them give  sidelong 
glances like they’re sizing  up. The Dauntless-born initiates are like a pack of dogs.  act the 
wrong  , they won’t let  run with them. But for now, am safe. 

We turn another corner,  a group of members stands at the end of the next hallway. There are too 
many of them  all be related  a Dauntless-born initiate, but see some similarities among the 
faces. 

“Let’s go,” one of the members says. He turns  plunges through a dark doorway. The other 
members follow him,  we follow them. stay close behind Uriah as pass into darkness   toe 
hits a step. catch myself before falling forward  start  climb. 

“Back staircase,” Uriah says, almost mumbling. “Usually locked.” 


nod, though    ’t see ,  climb until all the steps are gone. By then, a door at the top of the 
staircase is open, letting in daylight. We emerge from the ground a few hundred yards from the glass 
building above the Pit, close  the train tracks. 

feel like have done this a thousand times before. hear the train horn. feel the vibrations in the 
ground. see the light attached  the head car. crack  knuckles  bounce once on  toes. 

We jog in a single pack next  the car,  in waves, members  initiates alike pile into the car. 
Uriah gets in before ,  people press behind .  ’t make any mistakes; throw myself 
sideways, grabbing the handle on the side of the car,  hoist myself into the car. Uriah grabs  arm 
 steady . 

The train picks up its speed. Uriah  sit against one of the walls. 

shout over the wind, “Where are we going?” 

Uriah shrugs. “Zeke never told .” 

“Zeke?” 

“My older brother,”   says. He points across the room at a boy sitting in the doorway with his legs 
dangling out of the car. He is slight  short  looks nothing like Uriah, apart from his coloring. 

“You  get  know. That ruins the surprise!” the girl on  left shouts. She extends her hand. 
“  Shauna.” 

shake her hand, but  grip hard enough  let go too quickly. doubt will ever improve 
 handshake.  feels unnatural  grasp hands with strangers. 

“ —” start  say. 

“know who  are,” she says. “You’re the Stiff. Four told  about .” 

pray the heat in  cheeks is not visible. “Oh? What did   say?” 

She smirks at . “He said  were a Stiff. Why do  ask?” 

“  instructor is talking about ,” say, as firmly as , “want  know what  ’s saying.” 
hope tell a convincing lie. “He isn’t coming, is  ?” 

“No. He never comes  this,” she says. “’s probably lost its appeal. Not much scares him,  
know.” 

He isn’t coming. Something in  deflates like an untied balloon. ignore    nod. do know 
that Four is not a coward. But also know that at least one thing does scare him: heights. Whatever 
we’re doing,   must involve being high up for him  avoid  . She must not know that if she speaks of 
him with such reverence in her voice. 

“Do  know him well?” ask. am too curious; always have been. 

“Everyone knows Four,” she says. “We were initiates together. was bad at fighting, so   taught 
 every night after everyone was asleep.” She scratches the back of her neck, her expression 
suddenly serious. “Nice of him.” 

She gets up  stands behind the members sitting in the doorway. In a second, her serious 
expression is gone, but still feel rattled by what she said, half confused by the idea of Four being 
“nice”  half wanting  punch her for no apparent reason. 

“Here we go!” shouts Shauna. The train doesn’t slow down, but she throws herself out of the car. 
The other members follow her, a stream of black-clothed, pierced people not much older than am. 
stand in the doorway next  Uriah. The train is going much faster than   has every other time I’ve 
jumped, but  ’t lose  nerve now, in front of all these members. So jump, hitting the ground 
hard  stumbling forward a few steps before regain  balance. 



Uriah  jog  catch up  the members, along with the other initiates, who barely look in  
direction. 

look around as walk. The Hub is behind  , black against the clouds, but the buildings around  
are dark  silent. That means we must be north of the bridge, where the city is abandoned. 

We turn a corner  spread out as we walk down Michigan Avenue. South of the bridge, Michigan 
Avenue is a busy street, crawling with people, but here   is bare. 

As soon as lift  eyes  scan the buildings, know where we’re going: the empty Hancock 
building, a black pillar with crisscrossed girders, the tallest building north of the bridge. 

But what are we going  do? Climb  ? 

As we get closer, the members start  run,  Uriah  sprint  catch them. Jostling one 
another with their elbows, they push through a set of doors at the building’s base. The glass in one of 
them is broken, so   is just a frame. step through   instead of opening    follow the members 
through an eerie, dark entryway, crunching broken glass beneath  feet. 

expect    go up the stairs, but we stop at the elevator bank. 

“Do the elevators work?” ask Uriah, as quietly as . 

“Sure they do,” says Zeke, rolling his eyes. “You think   stupid enough not  come here early 
 turn on the emergency generator?” 

“Yeah,” says Uriah. “kinda do.” 

Zeke glares at his brother, then puts him in a headlock  rubs his knuckles into Uriah’s skull. 
Zeke may be smaller than Uriah, but   must be stronger. Or at least faster. Uriah smacks him in the 
side,    lets go. 

grin at the sight of Uriah’s disheveled hair,  the elevator doors open. We pile in, members in 
one  initiates in the other. A girl with a shaved head stomps on  toes on the   in  doesn’t 
apologize. grab  foot, wincing,  consider kicking her in the shins. Uriah stares at his reflection 
in the elevator doors  pats his hair down. 

“What floor?” the girl with the shaved head says. 

“One hundred,” say. 

“How would  know that?” 

“Lynn, come on,” says Uriah. “Be nice.” 

“We’re in a one-hundred-story abandoned building with some Dauntless,” retort. “Why   
know that?” 

She doesn’t respond. She just jams her thumb into the right button. 

The elevator zooms upward so fast  stomach sinks   ears pop. grab a railing at the side of 
the elevator, watching the numbers climb. We pass twenty,  thirty,  Uriah’s hair is finally 
smooth. Fifty, sixty,   toes are done throbbing. Ninety-eight, ninety-nine,  the elevator 
comes  a stop at one hundred.   glad we didn’t take the stairs. 

“wonder how we’ll get  the roof from...” Uriah’s voice trails off. 

A strong wind hits , pushing  hair across  face. There is a gaping hole in the ceiling of the 
hundredth floor. Zeke props an aluminum ladder against its edge  starts  climb. The ladder creaks 
 sways beneath his feet, but   keeps climbing, whistling as   does. When   reaches the roof,   
turns around  holds the top of the ladder for the next person. 

Part of  wonders if this is a suicide mission disguised as a game. 

 isn’t the first time I’ve wondered that since the Choosing Ceremony. 



climb the ladder after Uriah.  reminds  of climbing the rungs on the Ferris wheel with Four 
close at  heels. remember his fingers on  hip again, how they kept  from falling,  
almost miss a step on the ladder. Stupid. 

Biting  lip, make    the top  stand on the roof of the Hancock building. 

The wind is so powerful hear  feel nothing else. have  lean against Uriah  keep from 
falling over. At first, all see is the marsh, wide  brown  everywhere, touching the horizon, 
devoid of life. In the other direction is the city,  in many ways   is the same, lifeless  with 
limits do not know. 

Uriah points  something. Attached  one of the poles on top of the tower is a steel cable as thick 
as  wrist. On the ground is a pile of black slings made of tough fabric, large enough  hold a 
human being. Zeke grabs one  attaches    a pulley that hangs from the steel cable. 

follow the cable down, over the cluster of buildings  along Lake Shore Drive.  know 
where   ends. One thing is clear, though:  go through with this, I’ll find out. 

We’re going  slide down a steel cable in a black sling from one thousand feet up. 

“Oh  God,” says Uriah. 

All  do is nod. 

Shauna is the first person  get in the sling. She wriggles forward on her stomach until most of her 
body is supported by black fabric. Then Zeke pulls a strap across her shoulders, the small of her back, 
 the top of her thighs. He pulls her, in the sling,  the edge of the building  counts down from 
five. Shauna gives a thumbs-up as   shoves her forward, into nothingness. 

Lynn gasps as Shauna hurtles toward the ground at a steep incline, headfirst. push past her  see 
better. Shauna stays secure in the sling for as long as  see her,  then she’s too far away, just a 
black speck over Lake Shore Drive. 

The members whoop  pump their fists  form a line, sometimes shoving one another out of 
the    get a better place. Somehow am the first initiate in line, right in front of Uriah. Only 
seven people stand between   the zip line. 

Still, there is a part of  that groans, have  wait for seven people?  is a strange blend of terror 
 eagerness, unfamiliar until now. 

The next member, a young-looking boy with hair down  his shoulders, jumps into the sling on his 
back instead of his stomach. He stretches his arms wide as Zeke shoves him down the steel cable. 

None of the members seem at all afraid. They act like they have done this a thousand times before, 
 maybe they have. But when look over  shoulder, see that most of the initiates look pale or 
worried, even if they talk excitedly  one another. What happens between initiation  membership 
that transforms panic into delight? Or do people just get better at hiding their fear? 

Three people in front of . Another sling; a member gets in feet-first  crosses her arms over 
her chest. Two people. A tall, thick boy jumps up  down like a child before climbing into the sling 
 lets out a high screech as   disappears, making the girl in front of  laugh. One person. 

She hops into the sling face-first  keeps her hands in front of her as Zeke tightens her straps. 
And then  ’s  turn. 

shudder as Zeke hangs  sling from the cable. try  climb in, but have trouble;  hands are 
shaking too badly. 

“Don’t worry,” Zeke says right next   ear. He takes  arm  helps  get in, facedown. 

The straps tighten around  midsection,  Zeke slides  forward,  the edge of the roof. 



stare down the building’s steel girders  black windows, all the    the cracked sidewalk. am a 
fool for doing this. And a fool for enjoying the feeling of  heart slamming against  sternum  
sweat gathering in the lines of  palms. 

“Ready, Stiff?” Zeke smirks down at . “have  say,   impressed that  aren’t screaming 
 crying right now.” 

“told ,” Uriah says. “She’s Dauntless through  through. Now get on with  .” 

“Careful, brother, or might not tighten your straps enough,” Zeke says. He smacks his knee. “And 
then, splat\” 

“Yeah, yeah,” Uriah says. “And then our mother would boil  alive.” 

Hearing him talk about his mother, about his intact family, makes  chest hurt for a second, like 
someone pierced   with a needle. 

“Only if she found out.” Zeke tugs on the pulley attached  the steel cable.  holds, which is 
fortunate, because if   breaks,  death will be swift  certain. He looks down at   says, 
“Ready, set, g—” 

Before    finish the word “go,”   releases the sling  forget him, forget Uriah,  
family,  all the things that could malfunction  lead   death. hear metal sliding against 
metal  feel wind so intense   forces tears into  eyes as hurtle toward the ground. 

feel like am without substance, without weight. Ahead of  the marsh looks huge, its patches of 
brown spreading farther than  see, even up this high. The air is so cold  so fast that   hurts  
face. pick up speed  a shout of exhilaration rises within , stopped only by the wind that fills 
 mouth the second  lips part. 

Held secure by the straps, throw  arms out  the side  imagine that am flying. plunge 
toward the street, which is cracked  patchy  follows perfectly the curve of the marsh.  
imagine, up here, how the marsh looked when   was full of water, like liquid steel as   reflected the 
color of the sky. 

My heart beats so hard   hurts,   ’t scream   ’t breathe, but also feel everything, 
every vein  every fiber, every bone  every nerve, all awake  buzzing in  body as if 
charged with electricity. am pure adrenaline. 

The ground grows  bulges beneath ,   see the tiny people standing on the pavement 
below. should scream, like any rational human being would, but when open  mouth again, just 
crow with joy. yell louder,  the figures on the ground pump their fists  yell back, but they are 
so far away  barely hear them. 

look down  the ground smears beneath , all gray  white  black, glass  pavement 
 steel. Tendrils of wind, soft as hair, wrap around  fingers  push  arms back. try  pull 
 arms   chest again, but am not strong enough. The ground grows bigger  bigger. 

 slow down for another minute at least but sail parallel  the ground, like a bird. 

When slow down, run  fingers over  hair. The wind teased   into knots. hang about 
twenty feet above the ground, but that height seems like nothing now. reach behind   work  
undo the straps holding  in. My fingers shake, but still manage  loosen them. A crowd of 
members stands below. They grasp one another’s arms, forming a net of limbs beneath . 

In order  get down, have  trust them  catch . have  accept that these people are mine, 
 am theirs.  is a braver act than sliding down the zip line. 

wriggle forward  fall. hit their arms hard. Wrist bones  forearms press into  back,  
then palms wrap around  arms  pull    feet.  know which hands hold   



which hands ; see grins  hear laughter. 

“What’d  think?” Shauna says, clapping  on the shoulder. 

“Um...” All the members stare at . They look as windblown as feel, the frenzy of adrenaline in 
their eyes  their hair askew. know why  father said the Dauntless were a pack of madmen. He 
didn’t—couldn’t—understand the kind of camaraderie that forms only after you’ve all risked your 
lives together. 

“When  go again?” say. My smile stretches wide enough  show teeth,  when they laugh, 
laugh. think of climbing the stairs with the Abnegation, our feet finding the same rhythm, all of   
the same. This isn’t like that. We are not the same. But we are, somehow, one. 

look toward the Hancock building, which is so far from where stand that  ’t see the people on 
its roof. 

“Look! There   is!” someone says, pointing over  shoulder. follow the pointed finger toward a 
small dark shape sliding down the steel wire. A few seconds later hear a bloodcurdling scream. 

“bet  ’ll cry.” 

“Zeke’s brother, cry? No  . He would get punched so hard.” 

“His arms are flailing!” 

“He sounds like a strangled cat,” say. Everyone laughs again. feel a twinge of guilt for teasing 
Uriah when    ’t hear , but would have said the same thing if   were standing here. hope. 

When Uriah finally comes  a stop, follow the members  meet him. We line up beneath him  
thrust our arms into the space between  . Shauna clamps a hand around  elbow. grab another arm 
—  not sure who   belongs , there are too many tangled hands—and look up at her. 

“Pretty sure we  ’t call  ‘Stiff’ anymore,” Shauna says. She nods. “Tris.” 

still smell like wind when walk into the cafeteria that evening. For the second after walk in, 
stand among a crowd of Dauntless,  feel like one of them. Then Shauna waves    the 
crowd breaks apart,  walk toward the table where Christina, Al,  Will sit, gaping at . 

didn’t think about them when accepted Uriah’s invitation. In a  ,   is satisfying  see stunned 
looks on their faces. But  want them  be upset with  either. 

“Where were ?” asks Christina. “What were  doing with them?” 

“Uriah... know, the Dauntless-born who was on our capture the flag team?” say. “He was 
leaving with some of the members    begged them  let  come along. They didn’t really want 
 there. Some girl named Lynn stepped on .” 

“They may not have wanted  there then,” says Will quietly, “but they seem  like  now.” 

“Yeah,” say.  ’t deny  . “  glad  be back, though.” 

Hopefully they  ’t tell   lying, but suspect they . caught sight of myself in a window on 
the   into the compound,   cheeks  eyes were both bright,  hair tangled. look like 
have experienced something powerful. 

“Well,  missed Christina almost punching an Erudite,” says Al. His voice sounds eager.  
count on Al  try  break the tension. “He was here asking for opinions about the Abnegation 
leadership,  Christina told him there were more important things for him  be doing.” 

“Which she was completely right about,” adds Will. “And   got testy with her. Big mistake.” 

“Huge,” say, nodding.  smile enough, maybe  make them forget their jealousy, or hurt, or 
whatever is brewing behind Christina’s eyes. 

“Yeah,” she says. “While  were off having fun, was doing the dirty work of defending your old 



faction, eliminating interfaction conflict...” 

“Come on,  know  enjoyed  ,” says Will, nudging her with his elbow. “ you’re not going  
tell the whole story, will. He was standing...” 

Will launches into his story,  nod along like   listening, but all  think about is staring 
down the side of the Hancock building,  the image got of the marsh full of water, restored  its 
former glory. look over Will’s shoulder at the members, who are now flicking bits of food at one 
another with their forks. 

’s the first time have been really eager  be one of them. 

Which means have  survive the next stage of initiation. 

As far as  tell, the second stage of initiation involves sitting in a dark hallway with the other 
initiates, wondering what’s going  happen behind a closed door. 

Uriah sits across from , with Marlene on his left  Lynn on his right. The Dauntless-born 
initiates  the transfers were separated during stage one, but we will be training together from now 
on. That’s what Four told   before   disappeared behind the door. 

“So,” says Lynn, scuffing the floor with her shoe. “Which one of  is ranked first, huh?” 

Her question is met with silence at first,  then Peter clears his throat. 

“Me,”   says. 

“Bet could take .” She says   casually, turning the ring in her eyebrow with her fingertips. 
“  second, but bet any of   could take , transfer.” 

almost laugh.  was still Abnegation, her comment would be rude  out of place, but among 
the Dauntless, challenges like that seem common. am almost starting  expect them. 

“wouldn’t be so sure about that, if were ,” Peter says, his eyes glittering. “Who’s first?” 

“Uriah,” she says. “And am sure. You know how many years we’ve spent preparing for this?” 

 she intends  intimidate  ,   works. already feel colder. 

Before Peter  respond, Four opens the door  says, “Lynn.” He beckons  her,  she walks 
down the hallway, the blue light at the end making her bare head glow. 

“So you’re first,” Will says  Uriah. 

Uriah shrugs. “Yeah. And?” 

“And   think  ’s a little unfair that you’ve spent your entire life getting ready for this,  
we’re expected  learn   all in a few weeks?” Will says, his eyes narrowing. 

“Not really. Stage one was about skill, sure, but no one  prepare for stage two,”   says. “At 
least, so   told.” 

No one responds  that. We sit in silence for twenty minutes. count each minute on  watch. 
Then the door opens again,  Four calls another name. 

“Peter,”   says. 

Each minute wears into  like a scrape of sandpaper. Gradually, our numbers begin  dwindle, 
  ’s just   Uriah  Drew. Drew’s leg bounces,  Uriah’s fingers tap against his knee,  
try  sit perfectly still. hear only muttering from the room at the end of the hallway,  suspect 
this is another part of the game they like  play with  . Terrifying   at every opportunity. 

The door opens,  Four beckons  . “Come on, Tris.” 

stand,  back sore from leaning against the wall for so long,  walk past the other initiates. 
Drew sticks out his leg  trip , but hop over   at the last second. 

Four touches  shoulder  guide  into the room  closes the door behind . 

When see what’s inside, recoil immediately,  shoulders hitting his chest. 

In the room is a reclining metal chair, similar  the one sat in during the aptitude test. Beside   is 
a familiar machine. This room has no mirrors  barely any light. There is a computer screen on a 
desk in the corner. 

“Sit,” Four says. He squeezes  arms  pushes  forward. 

“What’s the simulation?” say, trying  keep  voice from shaking.  succeed. 


“Ever hear the phrase 'face your fears’?”   says. “We’re taking that literally. The simulation will 
teach   control your emotions in the midst of a frightening situation.” 

touch a wavering hand   forehead. Simulations aren’t real; they pose no real threat  , so 
logically, shouldn’t be afraid of them, but  reaction is visceral.  takes all the willpower have 
for   steer myself toward the chair  sit down in   again, pressing  skull into the headrest. 
The cold from the metal seeps through  clothes. 

“Do  ever administer the aptitude tests?” say. He seems qualified. 

“No,”   replies. “avoid Stiffs as much as possible.” 

 know why someone would avoid the Abnegation. The Dauntless or the Candor, maybe, 
because bravery  honesty make people do strange things, but the Abnegation? 

“Why?” 

“Do  ask  that because  think I’ll actually answer?” 

“Why do  say vague things if   want  be asked about them?” 

His fingers brush  neck. My body tenses. A tender gesture? No—  has  move  hair  the 
side. He taps something,  tilt  head back  see what   is. Four holds a syringe with a long 
needle in one hand, his thumb against the plunger. The liquid in the syringe is tinted orange. 

“An injection?” My mouth goes dry.  usually mind needles, but this one is huge. 

“We use a more advanced version of the simulation here,”   says, “a different serum, no wires or 
electrodes for .” 

“How does   work without wires?” 

“Well, have wires, so  see what’s going on,”   says. “But for , there’s a tiny transmitter 
in the serum that sends data  the computer.” 

He turns  arm over  eases the tip of the needle into the tender skin on the side of  neck. A 
deep ache spreads through  throat. wince  try  focus on his calm face. 

“The serum will go into effect in sixty seconds. This simulation is different from the aptitude test,” 
  says. “In addition  containing the transmitter, the serum stimulates the amygdala, which is the 
part of the brain involved in processing negative emotions—like fear—and then induces a 
hallucination. The brain’s electrical activity is then transmitted  our computer, which then translates 
your hallucination into a simulated image that  see  monitor. will then forward the recording 
 Dauntless administrators. You stay in the hallucination until  calm down—that is, lower your 
heart rate  control your breathing.” 

try  follow his words, but  thoughts are going haywire. feel the trademark symptoms of fear: 
sweaty palms, racing heart, tightness in  chest, dry mouth, a lump in  throat, difficulty 
breathing. He plants his hands on either side of  head  leans over . 

“Be brave, Tris,”   whispers. “The first time is always the hardest.” 

His eyes are the last thing see. 

stand in a field of dry grass that comes up   waist. The air smells like smoke  burns  
nostrils. Above  the sky is bile-colored,  the sight of   fills  with anxiety,  body cringing 
away from  . 

hear fluttering, like the pages of a book blown by the wind, but there is no wind. The air is still  
soundless apart from the flapping, neither hot nor cold—not like air at all, but  still breathe. A 
shadow swoops overhead. 

Something lands on  shoulder. feel its weight  the prick of talons  fling  arm forward 



 shake   off,  hand batting at  . feel something smooth  fragile. A feather. bite  lip  
look  the side. A black bird the size of  forearm turns its head  focuses one beady eye on . 

grit  teeth  hit the crow again with  hand.  digs in its talons  doesn’t move. cry out, 
more frustrated than pained,  hit the crow with both hands, but   stays in place, resolute, one eye 
on , feathers gleaming in the yellow light. Thunder rumbles  hear the patter of rain on the 
ground, but no rain falls. 

The sky darkens, like a cloud is passing over the sun. Still cringing away from the crow, look up. 
A flock of crows storms toward , an advancing army of outstretched talons  open beaks, each 
one squawking, filling the air with noise. The crows descend in a single mass, diving toward the earth, 
hundreds of beady black eyes shining. 

try  run, but  feet are firmly planted  refuse  move, like the crow on  shoulder. 
scream as they surround , feathers flapping in  ears, beaks pecking at  shoulders, talons 
clinging   clothes. scream until tears come from  eyes,  arms flailing. My hands hit solid 
bodies but do nothing; there are too many. am alone. They nip at  fingertips  press against  
body, wings sliding across the back of  neck, feet tearing at  hair. 

twist  wrench  fall  the ground, covering  head with  arms. They scream against . 
feel a wiggling in the grass, a crow forcing its   under  arm. open  eyes    pecks at  
face, its beak hitting  in the nose. Blood drips onto the grass  sob, hitting   with  palm, but 
another crow wedges under  other arm  its claws stick  the front of  shirt. 

am screaming; am sobbing. 

“Help!” wail. “Help!” 

And the crows flap harder, a roar in  ears. My body burns,  they are everywhere,   ’t 
think,  ’t breathe. gasp for air   mouth fills with feathers, feathers down  throat, in  
lungs, replacing  blood with dead weight. 

“Help,” sob  scream, insensible, illogical. am dying; am dying; am dying. 

My skin sears  am bleeding,  the squawking is so loud  ears are ringing, but am not 
dying,  remember that   isn’t real, but   feels real,   feels so real. Be brave. Four’s voice 
screams in  memory. cry out  him, inhaling feathers  exhaling “Help!” But there will be no 
help; am alone. 

You stay in the hallucination until   calm down, his voice continues,  cough,   
face is wet with tears,  another crow has wriggled under  arms,  feel the edge of its sharp 
beak against  mouth. s beak wedges past  lips  scrapes  teeth. The crow pushes its head 
into  mouth  bite hard, tasting something foul. spit  clench  teeth  form a barrier, but 
now a fourth crow is pushing at  feet,  a fifth crow is pecking at  ribs. 

Calm down.  ’t,  ’t. My head throbs. 

Breathe. keep  mouth closed  suck air into  nose.  has been hours since was alone in 
the field;   has been days. push air out of  nose. My heart pounds hard in  chest. have  slow 
  down. breathe again,  face wet with tears. 

sob again,  force myself forward, stretching out on the grass, which prickles against  skin. 
extend  arms  breathe. Crows push  prod at  sides, worming their   beneath ,  
let them. let the flapping of wings  the squawking  the pecking  the prodding continue, 
relaxing one muscle at a time, resigning myself  becoming a pecked carcass. 

The pain overwhelms . 

open  eyes,  am sitting in the metal chair. 



scream  hit  arms  head  legs  get the birds off , but they are gone, though  
still feel the feathers brushing the back of  neck  the talons in  shoulder   burning skin. 
moan  pull  knees   chest, burying  face in them. 

A hand touches  shoulder,  fling a fist out, hitting something solid but soft. “Don’t touch 
!” sob. 

“’s over,” Four says. The hand shifts awkwardly over  hair,  remember  father stroking 
 hair when   kissed  goodnight,  mother touching  hair when she trimmed   with the 
scissors. run  palms along  arms, still brushing off feathers, though know there aren’t any. 

“Tris.” 

rock back  forth in the metal chair. 

“Tris,   going  take  back  the dorms, okay?” 

“No!” snap. lift  head  glare at him, though  ’t see him through the blur of tears. “They 
 ’t see ...not like this...” 

“Oh, calm down,”   says. He rolls his eyes. “I’ll take  out the back door.” 

“ need  ...” shake  head. My body is trembling  feel so weak   not sure 
 stand, but have  try.  ’t be the only one who needs  be walked back  the dorms. Even if 
they  see , they’ll find out, they’ll talk about me— 

“Nonsense.” 

He grabs  arm  hauls  out of the chair. blink the tears from  eyes, wipe  cheeks 
with the heel of  hand,  let him steer  toward the door behind the computer screen. 

We walk down the hallway in silence. When we’re a few hundred yards away from the room, yank 
 arm away  stop. 

“Why did  do that  ?” say. “What was the point of that, huh? wasn’t aware that when 
chose Dauntless, was signing up for weeks of torture!” 

“Did  think overcoming cowardice would be easy?”   says calmly. 

“That isn’t overcoming cowardice! Cowardice is how  decide  be in real life,  in real life, 
am not getting pecked  death by crows, Four!” press  palms   face  sob into them. 

He doesn’t say anything, just stands there as cry.  only takes  a few seconds  stop  wipe 
 face again. “want  go home,” say weakly. 

But home is not an option anymore. My choices are here or the factionless slums. 

He doesn’t look at  with sympathy. He just looks at . His eyes look black in the dim corridor, 
 his mouth is set in a hard line. 

“Learning how  think in the midst of fear,”   says, “is a lesson that everyone, even your Stiff 
family, needs  learn. That’s what we’re trying  teach .    ’t learn  , you’ll need  get 
the hell out of here, because we won’t want .” 

“  trying.” My lower lip trembles. “But failed.   failing.” 

He sighs. “How long do  think  spent in that hallucination, Tris?” 

“ know.” shake  head. “A half hour?” 

“Three minutes,”   replies. “You got out three times faster than the other initiates. Whatever  
are, you’re not a failure.” 

Three minutes? 

He smiles a little. “Tomorrow you’ll be better at this. You’ll see.” 

“Tomorrow?” 



He touches  back  guides  toward the dormitory. feel his fingertips through  shirt. 
Their gentle pressure makes  forget the birds for a moment. 

“What was your first hallucination?” say, glancing at him. 

“ wasn’t a ‘what’ so much as a ‘who.’” He shrugs. “’s not important.” 

“And are  over that fear now?” 

“Not yet.” We reach the door  the dormitory,    leans against the wall, sliding his hands into 
his pockets. “may never be.” 

“So they  go away?” 

“Sometimes they do. And sometimes new fears replace them.” His thumbs hook around his belt 
loops. “But becoming fearless isn’t the point. That’s impossible. ’s learning how  control your 
fear,  how  be free from  , that’s the point.” 

nod. used  think the Dauntless were fearless. That is how they seemed, anyway. But maybe 
what saw as fearless was actually fear under control. 

“Anyway, your fears are rarely what they appear  be in the simulation,”   adds. 

“What do  mean?” 

“Well, are  really afraid of crows?”   says, half smiling at . The expression warms his eyes 
enough that forget  ’s  instructor. He’s just a boy, talking casually, walking    door. 
“When  see one, do  run away screaming?” 

“No. guess not.” think about stepping closer  him, not for any practical reason, but just because 
want  see what   would be like  stand that close  him; just because want . 

Foolish, a voice in  head says. 

step closer  lean against the wall too, tilting  head sideways  look at him. As did on the 
Ferris wheel, know exactly how much space there is between  . Six inches. lean. Less than six 
inches. feel warmer, like  ’s giving off some kind of energy that am only now close enough  
feel. 

“So what am really afraid of?” say. 

“ know,”   says. “Only   know.” 

nod slowly. There are a dozen things   could be, but   not sure which one is right, or if there’s 
even one right one. 

“didn’t know becoming Dauntless would be this difficult,” say,  a second later, am surprised 
that said  ; surprised that admitted   . bite the inside of  cheek  watch Four carefully. 
Was   a mistake  tell him that? 

“ wasn’t always like this,   told,”   says, lifting a shoulder. My admission doesn’t appear  
bother him. “Being Dauntless, mean.” 

“What changed?” 

“The leadership,”   says. “The person who controls training sets the standard of Dauntless 
behavior. Six years ago Max  the other leaders changed the training methods  make them more 
competitive  more brutal, said   was supposed  test people’s strength. And that changed the 
priorities of Dauntless as a whole. Bet   ’t guess who the leaders’ new protege is.” 

The answer is obvious: Eric. They trained him  be vicious,  now   will train the rest of    
be vicious too. 

look at Four. Their training didn’t work on him. 

“So if  were ranked first in your initiate class,” say, “what was Eric’s rank?” 



“Second.” 

“So   was their second choice for leadership.” nod slowly. “And  were their first.” 

“What makes  say that?” 

“The   Eric was acting at dinner the first night. Jealous, even though   has what   wants.” 

Four doesn’t contradict . must be right. want  ask why   didn’t take the position the leaders 
offered him; why   is so resistant  leadership when   seems  be a natural leader. But know how 
Four feels about personal questions. 

sniff, wipe  face one more time,  smooth down  hair. 

“Do look like I’ve been crying?” say. 

“Hmm.” He leans in close, narrowing his eyes like  ’s inspecting  face. A smile tugs at the 
corner of his mouth. Even closer, so we would be breathing the same air—if could remember  
breathe. 

“No, Tris,”   says. A more serious look replaces his smile as   adds, “You look tough as nails.” 

When walk in, most of the other initiates—Dauntless-born  transfer alike—are crowded 
between the rows of bunk beds with Peter at their center. He holds a piece of paper in both hands. 

“The mass exodus of the children of Abnegation leaders cannot be ignored or attributed  
coincidence,”   reads. “The recent transfer of Beatrice  Caleb Prior, the children of Andrew 
Prior, calls into question the soundness of Abnegation’s values  teachings.” 

Cold creeps up  spine. Christina, standing on the edge of the crowd, looks over her shoulder  
spots . She gives  a worried look.  ’t move. My father. Now the Erudite are attacking  
father. 

“Why else would the children of such an important man decide that the lifestyle   has set out for 
them is not an admirable one?” Peter continues. “Molly Atwood, a fellow Dauntless transfer, suggests 
a disturbed  abusive upbringing might be  blame. T heard her talking in her sleep once,’ Molly 
says. ‘She was telling her father  stop doing something.  know what   was, but   gave her 
nightmares.’” 

So this is Molly’s revenge. She must have talked  the Erudite reporter that Christina yelled at. 

She smiles. Her teeth are crooked.  knocked them out, might be doing her a favor. 

“What?” demand. Or try  demand, but  voice comes out strangled  scratchy,  have 
 clear  throat  say   again. “What?” 

Peter stops reading,  a few people turn around. Some, like Christina, look at  in a pitying  , 
their eyebrows drawn in, their mouths turned down at the corners. But most give  little smirks  
eye one another suggestively. Peter turns last, with a wide smile. 

“Give  that,” say, holding out  hand. My face burns. 

“But   not done reading,”   replies, laughter in his voice. His eyes scan the paper again. 
“However, perhaps the answer lies not in a morally bereft man, but in the corrupted ideals of an 
entire faction. Perhaps the answer is that we have entrusted our city  a group of proselytizing 
tyrants who do not know how  lead   out of poverty  into prosperity. ” 

storm up  him  try  snatch the paper from his hands, but   holds   up, high above  head 
so  ’t reach   unless jump,  won’t jump. Instead, lift  heel  stomp as hard as  
where the bones in his foot connect  his toes. He grits his teeth  stifle a groan. 

Then throw myself at Molly, hoping the force of the impact will surprise her  knock her down, 
but before  do any damage, cold hands close around  waist. 

“That’s  father !” scream. “My father,  coward!” 

Will pulls  away from her, lifting  off the ground. My breaths come fast,  struggle  
grab the paper before anyone  read another word of  . have  burn  ; have  destroy  ; have 
. 

Will drags  out of the room  into the hallway, his fingernails digging into  skin. Once the 
door shuts behind him,   lets go,  shove him as hard as . 

“What? Did  think couldn’t defend myself against that piece of Candor trash?” 

“No,” says Will. He stands in front of the door. “figured I’d stop  from starting a brawl in the 
dormitory. Calm down.” 

laugh a little. “Calm down? Calm down ? That’s  family they’re talking about, that’s  



faction !” 

“No,  ’s not.” There are dark circles under his eyes;   looks exhausted. “’s your old faction,  
there’s nothing   do about what they say, so  might as well just ignore  .” 

“Were  even listening?” The heat in  cheeks is gone,   breaths are more even now. 
“Your stupid ex-faction isn’t just insulting Abnegation anymore. They’re calling for an overthrow of 
the entire government.” 

Will laughs. “No, they’re not. They’re arrogant  dull,  that’s why left them, but they aren’t 
revolutionaries. They just want more say, that’s all,  they resent Abnegation for refusing  listen 
 them.” 

“They  want people  listen, they want people  agree,” reply. “And  shouldn’t bully 
people into agreeing with .” touch  palms   cheeks. “ ’t believe  brother joined 
them.” 

“Hey. They’re not all bad,”   says sharply. 

nod, but  believe him.  ’t imagine anyone emerging from the Erudite unscathed, though 
Will seems all right. 

The door opens again,  Christina  A1 walk out. 

“’s  turn  get tattooed,” she says. “Want  come with  ?” 

smooth  hair.  ’t go back into the dormitory. Even if Will let , am outnumbered there. 
My only choice is  go with them  try  forget what’s happening outside the Dauntless 
compound. have enough  worry about without anxiety about  family. 

Ahead of , A1 gives Christina a piggyback ride. She shrieks as   charges through the crowd. People 
give him a wide berth, when they . 

My shoulder still burns. Christina persuaded   join her in getting a tattoo of the Dauntless seal. 
 is a circle with a flame inside  . My mother didn’t even react  the one on  collarbone, so 
 have as many reservations about getting tattoos. They are a part of life here, just as integral  
 initiation as learning  fight. 

Christina also persuaded   purchase a shirt that exposes  shoulders  collarbone,   
line  eyes with black pencil again.  bother objecting  her makeover attempts anymore. 
Especially since find myself enjoying them. 

Will  walk behind Christina  Al. 

“ ’t believe  got another tattoo,”   says, shaking his head. 

“Why?” say. “Because   a Stiff?” 

“No. Because you’re...sensible.” He smiles. His teeth are white  straight. “So, what was your 
fear today, Tris?” 

“Too many crows,” reply. “You?” 

He laughs. “Too much acid.” 

 ask what that means. 

“’s really fascinating how   all works,”   says. “’s basically a struggle between your thalamus, 
which is producing the fear,  your frontal lobe, which makes decisions. But the simulation is all in 
your head, so even though  feel like someone is doing    ,  ’s just , doing    yourself 
...” He trails off. “Sorry. sound like an Erudite. Just a habit.” 

shrug. “’s interesting.” 

Al almost drops Christina,  she slaps her hands around the first thing she  grab, which just 



happens  be his face. He cringes  adjusts his grip on her legs. At a glance, A1 seems happy, but 
there is something heavy about even his smiles. am worried about him. 

see Four standing by the chasm, a group of people around him. He laughs so hard   has  grab 
the railing for balance. Judging by the bottle in his hand  the brightness of his face,  ’s 
intoxicated, or on his   there. had begun  think of Four as rigid, like a soldier,  forgot that 
 ’s also eighteen. 

“Uh-oh,” says Will. “Instructor alert.” 

“At least  ’s not Eric,” say. “He’d probably make   play chicken or something.” 

“Sure, but Four is scary. Remember when   put the gun up  Peter’s head? think Peter wet 
himself.” 

“Peter deserved  ,” say firmly. 

Will doesn’t argue with . He might have, a few weeks ago, but now we’ve all seen what Peter is 
capable of. 

“Tris!” Four calls out. Will  exchange a look, half surprise  half apprehension. Four pulls 
away from the railing  walks up  . Ahead of  , A1  Christina stop running,  Christina 
slides  the ground.  blame them for staring. There are four of  ,  Four is only talking  
. 

“You look different.” His words, normally crisp, are now sluggish. 

“So do ,” say. And   does—  looks more relaxed, younger. “What are  doing?” 

“Flirting with death,”   replies with a laugh. “Drinking near the chasm. Probably not a good idea.” 

“No,   isn’t.”   not sure like Four this  . There’s something unsettling about  . 

“Didn’t know  had a tattoo,”   says, looking at  collarbone. 

He sips the bottle. His breath smells thick  sharp. Like the factionless man’s breath. 

“Right. The crows,”   says. He glances over his shoulder at his friends, who are carrying on 
without him, unlike mine. He adds, “I’d ask   hang out with  , but you’re not supposed  see 
 this  .” 

am tempted  ask him why   wants   hang out with him, but suspect the answer has 
something  do with the bottle in his hand. 

“What  ?” ask. “Drunk?” 

“Yeah...well, no.” His voice softens. “Real, guess.” 

“I’ll pretend didn’t.” 

“Nice of .” He puts his lips next   ear  says, “You look good, Tris.” 

His words surprise ,   heart leaps. wish   didn’t, because judging by the   his eyes 
slide over mine,   has no idea what  ’s saying. laugh. “Do  a favor  stay away from the 
chasm, okay?” 

“Of course.” He winks at . 

 ’t help  . smile. Will clears his throat, but  want  turn away from Four, even when   
walks back  his friends. 

Then A1 rushes at  like a rolling boulder  throws  over his shoulder. shriek,  face hot. 

“Come on, little girl,”   says, “  taking   dinner.” 

rest  elbows on Al’s back  wave at Four as   carries  away. 

“thought would rescue ,” A1 says as we walk away. He sets  down. “What was that all 
about?” 



He is trying  sound lighthearted, but   asks the question almost sadly. He still cares too much 
about . 

“Yeah, think we’d all like  know the answer  that question,” says Christina in a singsong voice. 
“What did   say  ?” 

“Nothing.” shake  head. “He was drunk. He didn’t even know what   was saying.” clear  
throat. “That’s why was grinning. ’s...funny  see him that  .” 

“Right,” says Will. “Couldn’t possibly be because—” 

elbow Will hard in the ribs before    finish his sentence. He was close enough  hear what 
Four said   about looking good.  need him telling everyone about  , especially not Al. 
 want  make him feel worse. 

At home used  spend calm, pleasant nights with  family. My mother knit scarves for the 
neighborhood kids. My father helped Caleb with his homework. There was a fire in the fireplace  
peace in  heart, as was doing exactly what was supposed  be doing,  everything was quiet. 

have never been carried around by a large boy, or laughed until  stomach hurt at the dinner 
table, or listened  the clamor of a hundred people all talking at once. Peace is restrained; this is free. 

breathe through  nose. In, out. In. 

“’s just a simulation, Tris,” Four says quietly. 

He’s wrong. The last simulation bled into  life, waking  sleeping. Nightmares, not just 
featuring the crows but the feelings had in the simulation—terror  helplessness, which suspect 
is what am really afraid of. Sudden fits of terror in the shower, at breakfast, on the   here. Nails 
bitten down so far  nail beds ache. And am not the only one who feels this  ;  tell. 

Still nod  close  eyes. 

am in darkness. The last thing remember is the metal chair  the needle in  arm. This time 
there is no field; there are no crows. My heart pounds in anticipation. What monsters will creep from 
the darkness  steal  rationality? How long will have  wait for them? 

A blue orb lights up a few feet ahead of ,  then another one, filling the room with light. am 
on the Pit floor, next  the chasm,  the initiates stand around , their arms folded  their faces 
blank. search for Christina  find her standing among them. None of them move. Their stillness 
makes  throat feel tight. 

see something in front of me—my own faint reflection. touch  ,   fingers find glass, cool 
 smooth. look up. There is a pane above ; am in a glass box. press above  head  see if 
 force the box open.  doesn’t budge. am sealed in. 

My heart beats faster.  want  be trapped. Someone taps on the wall in front of . Four. He 
points at  feet, smirking. 

A few seconds ago,  feet were dry, but now stand in half an inch of water,   socks are 
soggy. crouch  see where the water is coming from, but   seems  be coming from nowhere, rising 
up from the box’s glass bottom. look up at Four,    shrugs. He joins the crowd of initiates. 

The water rises fast.  now covers  ankles. pound against the glass with  fist. 

“Hey!” say. “Let  out of here!” 

The water slides up  bare calves as   rises, cool  soft. hit the glass harder. 

“Get  out of here!” 

stare at Christina. She leans over  Peter, who stands beside her,  whispers something in his 
ear. They both laugh. 

The water covers  thighs. pound both fists against the glass.   not trying  get their attention 
anymore;   trying  break out. Frantic, bang against the glass as hard as . step back  
throw  shoulder into the wall, once, twice, three times, four times. hit the wall until  shoulder 
aches, screaming for help, watching the water rise   waist,  rib cage,  chest. 

“Help!” scream. “Please! Please help!” 

slap the glass. will die in this tank. drag  shaking hands through  hair. 

see Will standing among the initiates,  something tickles at the back of  mind. Something 
  said. Come on, think. stop trying  break the glass. ’s hard  breathe, but have  try. I’ll need 
as much air as  get in a few seconds. 

My body rises, weightless in the water. float closer  the ceiling  tilt  head back as the 
water covers  chin. Gasping, press  face  the glass above , sucking in as much air as . 
Then the water covers , sealing  into the box. 


Don’t panic. ’s no use—my heart pounds   thoughts scatter. thrash in the water, smacking 
the walls. kick the glass as hard as , but the water slows down  foot. The simulation is all in 
your head. 

scream,  water fills  mouth.   ’s in  head, control  . The water burns  eyes. The 
initiates’ passive faces stare back at . They  care. 

scream again  shove the wall with  palm. hear something. A cracking sound. When pull 
 hand away, there is a line in the glass. slam  other hand next  the first  drive another 
crack through the glass, this one spreading outward from  palm in long, crooked fingers. My chest 
burns like just swallowed fire. kick the wall. My toes ache from the impact,  hear a long, low 
groan. 

The pane shatters,  the force of the water against  back throws  forward. There is air again. 

gasp  sit up.   in the chair. gulp  shake out  hands. Four stands   right, but 
instead of helping  up,   just looks at . 

“What?” ask. 

“How did  do that?” 

“Do what?” 

“Crack the glass.” 

“ know.” Four finally offers  his hand. swing  legs over the side of the chair,  
when stand, feel steady. Calm. 

He sighs  grabs  by the elbow, half leading  half dragging  out of the room. We walk 
quickly down the hallway,  then stop, pulling  arm back. He stares at  in silence. He won’t 
give  information without prompting. 

“What?” demand. 

“You’re Divergent,”   replies. 

stare at him, fear pulsing through  like electricity. He knows. How does   know? must have 
slipped up. Said something wrong. 

should act casual. lean back, pressing  shoulders  the wall,  say, “What’s Divergent?” 

“Don’t play stupid,”   says. “suspected   last time, but this time  ’s obvious. You manipulated 
the simulation; you’re Divergent. I’ll delete the footage, but unless  want  wind up dead at the 
bottom of the chasm, you’ll figure out how  hide   during the simulations! Now, if you’ll excuse 
.” 

He walks back  the simulation room  slams the door behind him. feel  heartbeat in  
throat. manipulated the simulation; broke the glass. didn’t know that was an act of Divergence. 

How did  ? 

push myself away from the wall  start down the hallway. need answers,  know who has 
them. 

walk straight  the tattoo place where last saw Tori. 

There aren’t many people out, because  ’s midafter-noon  most of them are at work or at school. 
There are three people in the tattoo place: the other tattoo artist, who is drawing a lion on another 
man’s arm,  Tori, who is sorting through a stack of paper on the counter. She looks up when walk 
in. 

“Hello, Tris,” she says. She glances at the other tattoo artist, who is too focused on what  ’s doing 
 notice  . “Let’s go in the back.” 



follow her behind the curtain that separates the two rooms. The next room contains a few chairs, 
spare tattoo needles, ink, pads of paper,  framed artwork. Tori draws the curtain shut  sits in 
one of the chairs. sit next  her, tapping  feet  give myself something  do. 

“What’s going on?” she says. “How are the simulations going?” 

“Really well.” nod a few times. “A little too well, hear.” 

“Ah.” 

“Please help  understand,” say quietly. “What does   mean  be...” hesitate. should not say 
the word “Divergent” here. “What the hell am ? What does   have  do with the simulations?” 

Tori’s demeanor changes. She leans back  crosses her arms. Her expression becomes guarded. 

“Among other things, ... are someone who is aware, when they are in a simulation, that what 
they are experiencing is not real,” she says. “Someone who  then manipulate the simulation or even 
shut   down. And also...” She leans forward  looks into  eyes. “Someone who, because  are 
also Dauntless...tends  die.” 

A weight settles on  chest, like each sentence she speaks is piling there. Tension builds inside  
until  ’t stand  hold   in anymore—have  cry, or scream, or... 

let out a harsh little laugh that dies almost as soon as  ’s born  say, “So   going  die, 
then?” 

“Not necessarily,” she says. “The Dauntless leaders  know about  yet. deleted your 
aptitude results from the system immediately  manually logged your result as Abnegation. But 
make no mistake—if they discover what  are, they will kill .” 

stare at her in silence. She doesn’t look crazy. She sounds steady, if a little urgent,  I’ve never 
suspected her of being unbalanced, but she must be. There hasn’t been a murder in our city as long as 
I’ve been alive. Even if individuals are capable of  , the leaders of a faction  ’t possibly be. 

“You’re paranoid,” say. “The leaders of the Dauntless wouldn’t kill . People  do that. Not 
anymore. That’s the point of all this...all the factions.” 

“Oh,  think so?” She plants her hands on her knees  stares right at , her features taut with 
sudden ferocity. “They got  brother, why not , huh? What makes  special?” 

“Your brother?” say, narrowing  eyes. 

“Yeah. My brother. He  both transferred from Erudite, only his aptitude test was inconclusive. 
On the last day of simulations, they found his body in the chasm. Said   was a suicide. Only  
brother was doing well in training,   was dating another initiate,   was happy.” She shakes her head. 
“You have a brother, right? Don’t  think  would know if   was suicidal?” 

try  imagine Caleb killing himself. Even the thought sounds ridiculous  . Even if Caleb was 
miserable,   would not be an option. 

Her sleeves are rolled up, so  see a tattoo of a river on her right arm. Did she get   after her 
brother died? Was the river another fear she overcame? 

She lowers her voice. “In the second stage of training, Georgie got really good, really fast. He said 
the simulations weren’t even scary  him...they were like a game. So the instructors took a special 
interest in him. Piled into the room when   went under, instead of just letting the instructor report his 
results. Whispered about him all the time. The last day of simulations, one of the Dauntless leaders 
came in  see   himself. And the next day, Georgie was gone.” 

could be good at the simulations, if mastered whatever force helped  break the glass. could 
be so good that all the instructors took notice. could, but will ? 



“Is that all   is?” say. “Just changing the simulations?” 

“doubt  ,” she says, “but that’s all know.” 

“How many people know about this?” say, thinking of Four. “About manipulating the 
simulations?” 

“Two kinds of people,” she says. “People who want  dead. Or people who have experienced   
themselves. Firsthand. Or secondhand, like .” 

Four told    would delete the recording of  breaking the glass. He doesn’t want  dead. Is 
  Divergent? Was a family member? A friend? A girlfriend? 

push the thought aside.  ’t let him distract . 

“ understand,” say slowly, “why the Dauntless leaders care that  manipulate the 
simulation.” 

“ had   figured out, would have told  by now.” She presses her lips together. “The only 
thing I’ve come up with is that changing the simulation isn’t what they care about;  ’s just a symptom 
of something else. Something they do care about.” 

Tori takes  hand  presses   between her palms. 

“Think about this,” she says. “These people taught  how  use a gun. They taught  how  
fight. You think they’re above hurting ? Above killing ?” 

She releases  hand  stands. 

“have  go or Bud will ask questions. Be careful, Tris.” 

The door  the Pit closes behind ,  am alone. have not walked this tunnel since the day of 
the Choosing Ceremony. remember how walked   then,  footsteps unsteady, searching for light. 
walk   surefooted now.  need light anymore. 

 has been four days since spoke  Tori. Since then, Erudite has released two articles about 
Abnegation. The first article accuses Abnegation of withholding luxuries like cars  fresh fruit from 
the other factions in order  force their belief in self-denial on everyone else. When read  , 
thought of Will’s sister, Cara, accusing  mother of hoarding goods. 

The second article discusses the failings of choosing government officials based on their faction, 
asking why only people who define themselves as selfless should be in government.  promotes a 
return  the democratically elected political systems of the past.  makes a lot of sense, which makes 
 suspect   is a call for revolution wrapped in the clothing of rationality. 

reach the end of the tunnel. The net stretches across the gaping hole, just as   did when last saw 
 . climb the stairs  the wooden platform where Four pulled   solid ground  grab the bar 
that the net is attached . would not have been able  lift  body up with just  arms when first 
got here, but now do   almost without thinking  roll into the center of the net. 

Above  are the empty buildings that stand at the edge of the hole,  the sky.  is dark blue  
starless. There is no moon. 

The articles troubled , but had friends  cheer  up,  that is something. When the first one 
was released, Christina charmed one of the cooks in the Dauntless kitchens,    let   try some 
cake batter. After the second article, Uriah  Marlene taught  a card game,  we played for two 
hours in the dining hall. 

Tonight, though, want  be alone. More than that, want  remember why came here,  why 
was so determined  stay here that would jump off a building for  , even before knew what being 
Dauntless was. work  fingers through the holes in the net beneath . 

wanted  be like the Dauntless saw at school. wanted  be loud  daring  free like them. 
But they were not members yet; they were just playing at being Dauntless. And so was , when 
jumped off that roof. didn’t know what fear was. 

In the past four days, faced four fears. In one was tied  a stake  Peter set a fire beneath  
feet. In another was drowning again, this time in the middle of an ocean as the water raged around 
. In the third, watched as  family slowly bled  death. And in the fourth, was held at gunpoint 
 forced  shoot them. know what fear is now. 

Wind rushes over the lip of the hole  washes over ,  close  eyes. In  mind stand at 
the edge of the roof again. undo the buttons of  gray Abnegation shirt, exposing  arms, 
revealing more of  body than anyone else has ever seen. ball the shirt up  hurl   at Peter’s 
chest. 

open  eyes. No, was wrong; didn’t jump off the roof because wanted  be like the 
Dauntless. jumped off because already was like them,  wanted  show myself  them. 
wanted  acknowledge a part of myself that Abnegation demanded that hide. 

stretch  hands over  head  hook them in the net again. reach with  toes as far as 
, taking up as much of the net as possible. The night sky is empty  silent,  for the first time 
in four days, so is  mind. 


hold  head in  hands  breathe deeply. Today the simulation was the same as yesterday: 
Someone held  at gunpoint  ordered   shoot  family. When lift  head, see that Four 
is watching . 

“know the simulation isn’t real,” say. 

“You  have  explain    ,”   replies. “You love your family. You  want  shoot 
them. Not the most unreasonable thing in the world.” 

“In the simulation is the only time get  see them,” say. Even though   says , feel like 
have  explain why this fear is so difficult for   face. twist  fingers together  pull them 
apart. My nail beds are bitten raw—have been chewing them as sleep. wake  bloody hands every 
morning. “miss them. You ever just...miss your family?” 

Four looks down. “No,”   says eventually. “. But that’s unusual.” 

 is unusual, so unusual   distracts  from the memory of holding a gun  Caleb’s chest. What 
was his family like that   no longer cares about them? 

pause with  hand on the doorknob  look back at him. 

Are  like ? ask him silently. Are  Divergent? 

Even thinking the word feels dangerous. His eyes hold mine,  as the silent seconds pass,   looks 
less  less stern. hear  heartbeat. have been looking at him too long, but then,   has been 
looking back,  feel like we are both trying  say something the other  ’t hear, though could 
be imagining  . Too long—and now, even longer,  heart even louder, his tranquil eyes swallowing 
 whole. 

push the door open  hurry down the hallway. 

shouldn’t be so easily distracted by him. shouldn’t be able  think of anything but initiation. The 
simulations should disturb  more; they should break  mind, as they have been doing  most of 
the other initiates. Drew doesn’t sleep—  just stares at the wall, curled in a ball. A1 screams every 
night from his nightmares  cries into his pillow. My nightmares  chewed fingernails pale by 
comparison. 

Al’s screams wake  every time,  stare at the springs above   wonder what on earth is 
wrong with , that still feel strong when everyone else is breaking down. Is   being Divergent that 
makes  steady, or is   something else? 

When get back  the dormitory, expect  find the same thing found the day before: a few 
initiates lying on beds or staring at nothing. Instead they stand in a group on the other end of the room. 
Eric is in front of them with a chalkboard in his hands, which is facing the other  , so  ’t see 
what’s written on  . stand next  Will. 

“What’s going on?” whisper. hope   isn’t another article, because   not sure  handle any 
more hostility directed at . 

“Rankings for stage two,”   says. 

“thought there weren’t any cuts after stage two,” hiss. 

“There aren’t. ’s just a progress report, sort of.” 

nod. 

The sight of the board makes  feel uneasy, like something is swimming in  stomach. Eric lifts 
the board above his head  hangs   on the nail. When   steps aside, the room falls silent,  
crane  neck  see what   says. 

My name is in the first slot. 



Heads turn in  direction. follow the list down. Christina  Will are seventh  ninth, 
respectively. Peter is second, but when look at the time listed by his name, realize that the margin 
between   is conspicuously wide. 

Peter’s average simulation time is eight minutes. Mine is two minutes, forty-five seconds. 

“Nice job, Tris,” Will says quietly. 

nod, still staring at the board. should be pleased that am ranked first, but know what that 
means.  Peter  his friends hated  before, they will despise  now. Now am Edward.  could 
be  eye next. Or worse. 

search for Al’s name  find   in the last slot. The crowd of initiates breaks up slowly, leaving 
just , Peter, Will,  A1 standing there. want  console Al. To tell him that the only reason that 
  doing well is that there’s something different about  brain. 

Peter turns slowly, every limb infused with tension. A glare would have been less threatening than 
the look   gives me—a look of pure hatred. He walks toward his bunk, but at the last second,   
whips around  shoves  against a wall, a hand on each of  shoulders. 

“will not be outranked by a Stiff,”   hisses, his face so close  mine  smell his stale breath. 
“How did  do  , huh? How the hell did  do  ?” 

He pulls  forward a few inches  then slams  against the wall again. clench  teeth  
keep from crying out, though pain from the impact went all the   down  spine. Will grabs Peter 
by his shirt collar  drags him away from . 

“Leave her alone,”   says. “Only a coward bullies a little girl.” 

“A little girl?” scoffs Peter, throwing off Will’s hand. “Are  blind, or just stupid? She’s going  
edge  out of the rankings  out of Dauntless,  you’re going  get nothing, all because she 
knows how  manipulate people   . So when  realize that she’s out  ruin   all,  
let  know.” 

Peter storms out of the dormitory. Molly  Drew follow him, looks of disgust on their faces. 

“Thanks,” say, nodding  Will. 

“Is   right?” Will asks quietly. “Are  trying  manipulate  ?” 

“How on earth would do that?” scowl at him. “  just doing the best , like anyone else.” 

“ know.” He shrugs a little. “By acting weak so we pity ? And then acting tough  psyche 
  out?” 

“Psyche  out?” repeat. “  your friend. wouldn’t do that.” 

He doesn’t say anything.  tell   doesn’t believe me—not quite. 

“Don’t be an idiot, Will,” says Christina, hopping down from her bunk. She looks at  without 
sympathy  adds, “She’s not acting.” 

Christina turns  leaves, without banging the door shut. Will follows. am alone in the room with 
Al. The first  the last. 

Al has never looked small before, but   does now, with his shoulders slumped  his body 
collapsing on itself like crumpled paper. He sits down on the edge of his bed. 

“Are  all right?” ask. 

“Sure,”   says. 

His face is bright red. look away. Asking him was just a formality. Anyone with eyes could see 
that Al is not all right. 

“’s not over,” say. “You  improve your rank if ...” 



My voice trails off when   looks up at .  even know what would say  him if finished 
 sentence. There is no strategy for stage two.  reaches deep into the heart of who we are  tests 
whatever courage is there. 

“See?”   says. “’s not that simple.” 

“know  ’s not.” 

“ think  do,”   says, shaking his head. His chin wobbles. “For   ’s easy. All of this is 
easy.” 

“That’s not true.” 

“Yeah,   is.” He closes his eyes. “You aren’t helping  by pretending   isn’t. —  not 
sure   help  at all.” 

feel like just walked into a downpour,  all  clothes are heavy with water; like am heavy 
 awkward  useless.  know if   means that no one  help him, or if , specifically,  ’t 
help him, but would not be okay with either interpretation. want  help him. am powerless  do 
so. 

“I...,” start  say, meaning  apologize, but for what? For being more Dauntless than   is? For 
not knowing what  say? 

“just...” The tears that have been gathering in his eyes spill over, wetting his cheeks, “...want  
be alone.” 

nod  turn away from him. Leaving him is not a good idea, but  ’t stop myself. The door 
clicks into place behind ,  keep walking. 

walk past the drinking fountain  through the tunnels that seemed endless the day got here but 
now barely register in  mind. This is not the first time have failed  family since got here, but 
for some reason,   feels that  . Every other time failed, knew what  do but chose not  do  . 
This time, did not know what  do. Have lost the ability  see what people need? Have lost part 
of myself? 

keep walking. 

somehow find the hallway sat in the day Edward left.  want  be alone, but  feel like 
have much of a choice. close  eyes  pay attention  the cold stone beneath   breathe the 
musty underground air. 

“Tris!” someone calls from the end of the hallway. Uriah jogs toward . Behind him are Lynn  
Marlene. Lynn is holding a muffin. 

“Thought would find  here.” He crouches near  feet. “heard  got ranked first.” 

“So  just wanted  congratulate ?” smirk. “Well, thanks.” 

“Someone should,”   says. “And figured your friends might not be so congratulatory, since their 
ranks aren’t as high. So quit moping  come with  .   going  shoot a muffin off Marlene’s 
head.” 

The idea is so ridiculous  ’t stop myself from laughing. get up  follow Uriah  the end of 
the hallway, where Marlene  Lynn are waiting. Lynn narrows her eyes at , but Marlene grins. 

“Why aren’t  out celebrating?” she asks. “You’re practically guaranteed a top ten spot if  
keep   up.” 

“She’s too Dauntless for the other transfers,” Uriah says. 

“And too Abnegation  ‘celebrate,’” remarks Lynn. 

ignore her. “Why are  shooting a muffin off Marlene’s head?” 



“She bet  couldn’t aim well enough  hit a small object from one hundred feet,” Uriah 
explains. “bet her she didn’t have the guts  stand there as tried.  works out well, really.” 

The training room where first fired a gun is not far from  hidden hallway. We get there in under 
a minute,  Uriah flips on a light switch.  looks the same as the last time was there: targets on 
one end of the room, a table with guns on the other. 

“They just keep these lying around?” ask. 

“Yeah, but they aren’t loaded.” Uriah pulls up his shirt. There is a gun stuck under the waistband of 
his pants, right under a tattoo. stare at the tattoo, trying  figure out what   is, but then   lets his 
shirt fall. “Okay,”   says. “Go stand in front of a target.” 

Marlene walks away, a skip in her step. 

“You aren’t seriously going  shoot at her, are ?” ask Uriah. 

“’s not a real gun,” says Lynn quietly. “’s got plastic pellets in  . The worst  ’ll do is sting her 
face, maybe give her a welt. What do  think we are, stupid?” 

Marlene stands in front of one of the targets  sets the muffin on her head. Uriah squints one eye 
as   aims the gun. 

“Wait!” calls out Marlene. She breaks off a piece of the muffin  pops   into her mouth. 
“Mmkay!” she shouts, the word garbled by food. She gives Uriah a thumbs-up. 

“take   your ranks were good,” say  Lynn. 

She nods. “Uriah’s second.   first. Marlene’s fourth.” 

“You’re only first by a hair,” says Uriah as   aims. He squeezes the trigger. The muffin falls off 
Marlene’s head. She didn’t even blink. 

“We both win!” she shouts. 

“You miss your old faction?” Lynn asks . 

“Sometimes,” say. “ was calmer. Not as exhausting.” 

Marlene picks up the muffin from the ground  bites into  . Uriah shouts, “Gross!” 

“Initiation’s supposed  wear   down  who we really are. That’s what Eric says, anyway,” Lynn 
says. She arches an eyebrow. 

“Four says  ’s  prepare  .” 

“Well, they  agree on much.” 

nod. Four told  that Eric’s vision for Dauntless is not what  ’s supposed  be, but wish   
would tell  exactly what   thinks the right vision is. get glimpses of   every so often—the 
Dauntless cheering when jumped off the building, the net of arms that caught  after zip lining— 
but they are not enough. Has   read the Dauntless manifesto? Is that what   believes in—in ordinary 
acts of bravery? 

The door  the training room opens. Shauna, Zeke,  Four walk in just as Uriah fires at another 
target. The plastic pellet bounces off the center of the target  rolls along the ground. 

“thought heard something in here,” says Four. 

“Turns out  ’s  idiot brother,” says Zeke. “You’re not supposed  be in here after hours. 
Careful, or Four will tell Eric,  then you’ll be as good as scalped.” 

Uriah wrinkles his nose at his brother  puts the pellet gun away. Marlene crosses the room, 
taking bites of her muffin,  Four steps away from the door  let   file out. 

“You wouldn’t tell Eric,” says Lynn, eyeing Four suspiciously. 

“No, wouldn’t,”   says. As pass him,   rests his hand on the top of  back  usher  out, 



his palm pressing between  shoulder blades. shiver. hope    ’t tell. 

The others walk down the hallway, Zeke  Uriah shoving each other, Marlene splitting her muffin 
with Shauna, Lynn marching in front. start  follow them. 

“Wait a second,” Four says. turn toward him, wondering which version of Four I’ll see now—the 
one who scolds , or the one who climbs Ferris wheels with . He smiles a little, but the smile 
doesn’t spread  his eyes, which look tense  worried. 

“You belong here,  know that?”   says. “You belong with  . ’ll be over soon, so just hold on, 
okay?” 

He scratches behind his ear  looks away, like  ’s embarrassed by what   said. 

stare at him. feel  heartbeat everywhere, even in  toes. feel like doing something bold, but 
could just as easily walk away. am not sure which option is smarter, or better. am not sure that 
care. 

reach out  take his hand. His fingers slide between mine.  ’t breathe. 

stare up at him,    stares down at . For a long moment, we stay that  . Then pull  
hand away  run after Uriah  Lynn  Marlene. Maybe now   thinks   stupid, or strange. 
Maybe   was worth  . 

get back  the dormitory before anyone else does,  when they start  trickle in, get into bed 
 pretend  be asleep.  need any of them, not if they’re going  react this   when do 
well.   make   through initiation, will be Dauntless,  won’t have  see them anymore. 

 need them—but do want them? Every tattoo got with them is a mark of their friendship, 
 almost every time have laughed in this dark place was because of them.  want  lose 
them. But feel like have already. 

After at least a half hour of racing thoughts, roll onto  back  open  eyes. The dormitory is 
dark now—everyone has gone  bed. Probably exhausted from resenting  so much , think with a 
wry smile. As if coming from the most hated faction wasn’t enough, now   showing them up, too. 

get out of bed  get a drink of water.   not thirsty, but need  do something. My bare feet 
make sticky sounds on the floor as walk,  hand skimming the wall  keep  path straight. A 
bulb glows blue above the drinking fountain. 

tug  hair over one shoulder  bend over. As soon as the water touches  lips, hear voices 
at the end of the hallway. creep closer  them, trusting the dark  keep  hidden. 

“So far there haven’t been any signs of  .” Eric’s voice. Signs of what? 

“Well,  wouldn’t have seen much of   yet,” someone replies. A female voice; cold  familiar, 
but familiar like a dream, not a real person. “Combat training shows  nothing. The simulations, 
however, reveal who the Divergent rebels are, if there are any, so we will have  examine the footage 
several times  be sure.” 

The word “Divergent” makes  go cold. lean forward,  back pressed  the stone,  see who 
the familiar voice belongs . 

“Don’t forget the reason had Max appoint ,” the voice says. “Your first priority is always 
finding them. Always.” 

“won’t forget.” 

shift a few inches forward, hoping am still hidden. Whoever that voice belongs , she is pulling 
the strings; she is responsible for Eric’s leadership position; she is the one who wants  dead. tilt 
 head forward, straining  see them before they turn the corner. 



Then someone grabs  from behind. 

start  scream, but a hand claps over  mouth.  smells like soap   ’s big enough  cover 
the lower half of  face. thrash, but the arms holding  are too strong,  bite down on one of 
the fingers. 

“Ow!” a rough voice cries. 

“Shut up  keep her mouth covered.” That voice is higher than the average male’s  clearer. 
Peter. 

A strip of dark cloth covers  eyes,  a new pair of hands ties   at the back of  head. 
struggle  breathe. There are at least two hands on  arms, dragging  forward,  one on  
back, shoving  in the same direction,  one on  mouth, keeping  screams in. Three people. 
My chest hurts.  ’t resist three people on  own. 

“Wonder what   sounds like when a Stiff begs for mercy,” Peter says with a chuckle. “Hurry up.” 

try  focus on the hand on  mouth. There must be something distinct about   that will make 
him easier  identify. His identity is a problem  solve. need  solve a problem right now, or 
will panic. 

The palm is sweaty  soft. clench  teeth  breathe through  nose. The soap smell is 
familiar. Lemongrass  sage. The same smell surrounds Al’s bunk. A weight drops into  
stomach. 

hear the crash of water against rocks. We are near the chasm—we must be above  , given the 
volume of the sound. press  lips together  keep from screaming.  we are above the chasm, 
know what they intend  do  . 

“Lift her up, c’mon.” 

thrash,  their rough skin grates against mine, but know  ’s useless. scream too, knowing 
that no one  hear  here. 

will survive until tomorrow. will. 

The hands push  around  up  slam  spine into something hard  cold. Judging by its 
width  curvature,   is a metal railing.  is the metal railing, the one that overlooks the chasm. My 
breaths wheeze  mist touches the back of  neck. The hands force  back  arch over the 
railing. My feet leave the ground,   attackers are the only thing keeping  from falling into the 
water. 

A heavy hand gropes along  chest. “You sure you’re sixteen, Stiff? Doesn’t feel like you’re more 
than twelve.” The other boys laugh. 

Bile rises in  throat  swallow the bitter taste. 

“Wait, think found something!” His hand squeezes . bite  tongue  keep from screaming. 
More laughter. 

Al’s hand slips from  mouth. “Stop that,”   snaps. recognize his low, distinct voice. 

When A1 lets go of , thrash again  slip down  the ground. This time, bite down as hard as 
 on the first arm find. hear a scream  clench  jaw harder, tasting blood. Something hard 
strikes  face. White heat races through  head.  would have been pain if adrenaline wasn’t 
coursing through  like acid. 

The boy wrenches his trapped arm away from   throws   the ground. bang  elbow 
against stone  bring  hands up   head  remove the blindfold. A foot drives into  side, 
forcing the air from  lungs. gasp  cough  claw at the back of  head. Someone grabs a 



handful of  hair  slams  head against something hard. A scream of pain bursts from  
mouth,  feel dizzy. 

Clumsily, fumble along the side of  head  find the edge of the blindfold. drag  heavy 
hand up, taking the blindfold with  ,  blink. The scene before  is sideways  bobs up  
down. see someone running toward    someone running away—someone large, Al. grab the 
railing next    haul myself   feet. 

Peter wraps a hand around  throat  lifts  up, his thumb wedged under  chin. His hair, 
which is usually shiny  smooth, is tousled  sticks  his forehead. His pale face is contorted  
his teeth are gritted,    holds  over the chasm as spots appear on the edges of  vision, 
crowding around his face, green  pink  blue. He says nothing. try  kick him, but  legs are 
too short. My lungs scream for air. 

hear a shout,    releases . 

stretch out  arms as fall, gasping,   armpits slam into the railing. hook  elbows 
over    groan. Mist touches  ankles. The world dips  sways around ,  someone is on 
the Pit floor—Drew—screaming. hear thumps. Kicks. Groans. 

blink a few times  focus as hard as  on the only face  see.  is contorted with anger. 
His eyes are dark blue. 

“Four,” croak. 

close  eyes,  hands wrap around  arms, right where they join with the shoulder. He pulls 
 over the railing  against his chest, gathering  into his arms, easing an arm under  knees. 
press  face into his shoulder,  there is a sudden, hollow silence. 
open  eyes  the words “Fear God Alone” painted on a plain white wall. hear the sound of 
running water again, but this time  ’s from a faucet  not from the chasm. Seconds go by before 
see definite edges in  surroundings, the lines of door frame  countertop  ceiling. 

The pain is a constant throb in  head  cheek  ribs. shouldn’t move;   will make 
everything worse. see a blue patchwork quilt under  head  wince as tilt  head  see where 
the water sound is coming from. 

Four stands in the bathroom with his hands in the sink. Blood from his knuckles turns the sink water 
pink. He has a cut at the corner of his mouth, but   seems otherwise unharmed. His expression is 
placid as   examines his cuts, turns off the water,  dries his hands with a towel. 

have only one memory of getting here,  even that is just a single image: black ink curling 
around the side of a neck, the corner of a tattoo,  the gentle sway that could only mean   was 
carrying . 

He turns off the bathroom light  gets an ice pack from the refrigerator in the corner of the room. 
As   walks toward , consider closing  eyes  pretending  be asleep, but then our eyes 
meet   ’s too late. 

“Your hands,” croak. 

“My hands are none of your concern,”   replies. He rests his knee on the mattress  leans over 
, slipping the ice pack under  head. Before   pulls away, reach out  touch the cut on the side 
of his lip but stop when realize what am about  do,  hand hovering. 

What do  have  lose? ask myself. touch  fingertips lightly  his mouth. 

“Tris,”   says, speaking against  fingers, “  all right.” 

“Why were  there?” ask, letting  hand drop. 

“was coming back from the control room. heard a scream.” 

“What did  do  them?” say. 

“deposited Drew at the infirmary a half hour ago,”   says. “Peter  A1 ran. Drew claimed they 
were just trying  scare . At least, think that’s what   was trying  say.” 

“He’s in bad shape?” 

“He’ll live,”   replies. He adds bitterly, “In what condition,  ’t say.” 

 isn’t right  wish pain on other people just because they hurt  first. But white-hot triumph 
races through  at the thought of Drew in the infirmary,  squeeze Four’s arm. 

“Good,” say. My voice sounds tight  fierce. Anger builds inside , replacing  blood with 
bitter water  filling , consuming . want  break something, or hit something, but am 
afraid  move, so start crying instead. 

Four crouches by the side of the bed,  watches . see no sympathy in his eyes. would have 
been disappointed if had. He pulls his wrist free ,   surprise, rests his hand on the side of  
face, his thumb skimming  cheekbone. His fingers are careful. 

“could report this,”   says. 

“No,” reply. “ want them  think   scared.” 

He nods. He moves his thumb absently over  cheekbone, back  forth. “figured  would 
say that.” 


“You think   would be a bad idea if sat up?” 

“I’ll help .” 

Four grips  shoulder with one hand  holds  head steady with the other as push myself up. 
Pain rushes through  body in sharp bursts, but try  ignore  , stifling a groan. 

He hands  the ice pack. “You  let yourself be in pain,”   says. “’s just  here.” 

bite down on  lip. There are tears on  face, but neither of   mentions or even acknowledges 
them. 

“suggest  rely on your transfer friends  protect  from now on,”   says. 

“thought was,” say. feel Al’s hand against  mouth again,  a sob jolts  body forward. 
press  hand   forehead  rock slowly back  forth. “But Al...” 

“He wanted   be the small, quiet girl from Abnegation,” Four says softly. “He hurt  
because your strength made him feel weak. No other reason.” 

nod  try  believe him. 

“The others won’t be as jealous if  show some vulnerability. Even if   isn’t real.” 

“You think have  pretend  be vulnerable?” ask, raising an eyebrow. 

“Yes, do.” He takes the ice pack from , his fingers brushing mine,  holds   against  head 
himself. put  hand down, too eager  relax  arm  object. Four stands up. stare at the hem of 
his T-shirt. 

Sometimes see him as just another person,  sometimes feel the sight of him in  gut, like a 
deep ache. 

“You’re going  want  march into breakfast tomorrow  show your attackers they had no effect 
on ,”   adds, “but  should let that bruise on your cheek show,  keep your head down.” 

The idea nauseates . 

“ think  do that,” say hollowly. lift  eyes  his. 

“You have .” 

“ think  get  .” Heat rises into  face. “They touched .” 

His entire body tightens at  words, his hand clenching around the ice pack. “Touched ,”   
repeats, his dark eyes cold. 

“Not...in the   you’re thinking.” clear  throat. didn’t realize when said   how awkward   
would be  talk about. “But...almost.” 

look away. 

He is silent  still for so long that eventually, have  say something. 

“What is  ?” 

“ want  say this,”   says, “but feel like have .  is more important for   be safe 
than right, for the time being. Understand?” 

His straight eyebrows are drawn low over his eyes. My stomach writhes, partly because know   
makes a good point but  want  admit  ,  partly because want something  know 
how  express; want  press against the space between   until   disappears. 

nod. 

“But please, when  see an opportunity...” He presses his hand   cheek, cold  strong,  
tilts  head up so have  look at him. His eyes glint. They look almost predatory. “Ruin them.” 

laugh shakily. “You’re a little scary, Four.” 

“Do  a favor,”   says, “and  call  that.” 



“What should call , then?” 

“Nothing.” He takes his hand from  face. “Yet.” 

 go back  the dorms that night. Sleeping in the same room as the people who attacked  
just  look brave would be stupid. Four sleeps on the floor  sleep on his bed, on top of the quilt, 
breathing in the scent of his pillowcase.  smells like detergent  something heavy, sweet,  
distinctly male. 

The rhythm of his breaths slows,  prop myself up  see if   is asleep. He lies on his stomach 
with one arm around his head. His eyes are closed, his lips parted. For the first time,   looks as young 
as   is,  wonder who   really is. Who is   when   isn’t Dauntless, isn’t an instructor, isn’t 
Four, isn’t anything in particular? 

Whoever   is, like him. ’s easier for   admit that  myself now, in the dark, after all that 
just happened. He is not sweet or gentle or particularly kind. But   is smart  brave,  even 
though   saved ,   treated  like was strong. That is all need  know. 

watch the muscles in his back expand  contract until fall asleep. 

wake  aches  pains. cringe as sit up, holding  ribs,  walk up  the small mirror on 
the opposite wall. am almost too short  see myself in  , but when stand on  tiptoes,  see 
 face. As expected, there is a dark blue bruise on  cheek. hate the idea of slumping into the 
dining hall like this, but Four’s instructions have stayed with . have  mend  friendships. 
need the protection of seeming weak. 

tie  hair in a knot at the back of  head. The door opens  Four walks in, a towel in hand 
 his hair glistening with shower water. feel a thrill in  stomach when see the line of skin that 
shows above his belt as   lifts his hand  dry his hair  force  eyes up  his face. 

“Hi,” say. My voice sounds tight. wish   didn’t. 

He touches  bruised cheek with just his fingertips. “Not bad,”   says. “How’s your head?” 

“Fine,” say.   lying—my head is throbbing. brush  fingers over the bump,  pain prickles 
over  scalp.  could be worse. could be floating in the river. 

Every muscle in  body tightens as his hand drops   side, where got kicked. He does   
casually, but  ’t move. 

“And your side?”   asks, his voice low. 

“Only hurts when breathe.” 

He smiles. “Not much   do about that.” 

“Peter would probably throw a party if stopped breathing.” 

“Well,”   says, “would only go if there was cake.” 

laugh,  then wince, covering his hand  steady  rib cage. He slides his hand back slowly, his 
fingertips grazing  side. When his fingers lift, feel an ache in  chest. Once this moment ends, 
have  remember what happened last night. And want  stay here with him. 

He nods a little  leads the   out. 

“I’ll go in first,”   says when we stand outside the dining hall. “See  soon, Tris.” 

He walks through the doors  am alone. Yesterday   told    thought would have  
pretend  be weak, but   was wrong. am weak already. brace myself against the wall  press  
forehead   hands. ’s difficult  take deep breaths, so take short, shallow ones.  ’t let this 
happen. They attacked   make  feel weak.  pretend they succeeded  protect myself, but 


 ’t let   become true. 

pull away from the wall  walk into the dining hall without another thought. A few steps in, 
remember   supposed  look like   cowering, so slow  pace  hug the wall, keeping  
head down. Uriah, at the table next  Will  Christina’s, lifts his hand  wave at . And then puts 
  down. 

sit next  Will. 

A1 isn’t there—  isn’t anywhere. 

Uriah slides into the seat next  , leaving his half-eaten muffin  half-finished glass of water 
on the other table. For a second, all three of them just stare at . 

“What happened?” Will asks, lowering his voice. 

look over his shoulder at the table behind ours. Peter sits there, eating a piece of toast  
whispering something  Molly. My hand clenches around the edge of the table. want him  hurt. 
But now isn’t the time. 

Drew is missing, which means  ’s still in the infirmary. Vicious pleasure courses through  at 
the thought. 

“Peter, Drew...,” say quietly. hold  side as reach across the table for a piece of toast.  hurts 
 stretch out  hand, so let myself wince  hunch over. “And...” swallow. “And Al.” 

“Oh God,” says Christina, her eyes wide. 

“Are  all right?” Uriah asks. 

Peter’s eyes find mine across the dining hall,  have  force myself  look away.  brings a 

bitter taste   mouth  show him that   scares , but have . Four was right. have  do 

everything   make sure  get attacked again. 

“Not really,” say. 

My eyes burn,   ’s not artifice, unlike the wincing. shrug. believe Tori’s warning now. Peter, 
Drew,  Al were ready  throw  into the chasm out of jealousy—what is so unbelievable about 
the Dauntless leaders committing murder? 

feel uncomfortable, like   wearing someone else’s skin.    not careful, could die.  ’t 
even trust the leaders of  faction. My new family. 

“But you’re just...” Uriah purses his lips. “ isn’t fair. Three against one?” 

“Yeah,  Peter is all about what’s fair. That’s why   grabbed Edward in his sleep  stabbed 
him in the eye.” Christina snorts  shakes her head. “Al, though? Are  sure, Tris?” 

stare at  plate.   the next Edward. But unlike him,   not going  leave. 

“Yeah,” say. “  sure.” 

“ has  be desperation,” says Will. “He’s been acting... know. Like a different person. 
Ever since stage two started.” 

Then Drew shuffles into the dining hall. drop  toast,   mouth drifts open. 

Calling him “bruised” would be an understatement. His face is swollen  purple. He has a split lip 
 a cut running through his eyebrow. He keeps his eyes down on the    his table, not even 
lifting them  look at . glance across the room at Four. He wears the satisfied smile wish had 
on. 

“Did  do that?” hisses Will. 

shake  head. “No. Someone—never saw who—found  right before...” gulp. Saying   out 
loud makes   worse, makes   real. “...1 got tossed into the chasm.” 



“They were going  kill ?” says Christina in a low voice. 

“Maybe. They might have been planning on dangling  over   just  scare .” lift a shoulder. 
“ worked.” 

Christina gives  a sad look. Will just glares at the table. 

“We have  do something about this,” Uriah says in a low voice. 

“What, like beat them up?” Christina grins. “Looks like that’s been taken care of already.” 

“No. That’s pain they  get over,” replies Uriah. “We have  edge them out of the rankings. That 
will damage their futures. Permanently.” 

Four gets up  stands between the tables. Conversation abruptly ceases. 

“Transfers. We’re doing something different today,”   says. “Follow .” 

We stand,  Uriah’s forehead wrinkles. “Be careful,”   tells . 

“Don’t worry,” says Will. “We’ll protect her.” 

Four leads   out of the dining hall  along the paths that surround the Pit. Will is on  left, 
Christina is on  right. 

“never really said was sorry,” Christina says quietly. “For taking the flag when  earned  . 
 know what was wrong with .” 

  not sure if  ’s smart  forgive her or not—to forgive either of them, after what they said   
when the rankings went up yesterday. But  mother would tell  that people are flawed  
should be lenient with them. And Four told   rely on  friends. 

 know who should rely on more, because   not sure who  true friends are. Uriah  
Marlene, who were on  side even when seemed strong, or Christina  Will, who have always 
protected  when seemed weak? 

When her wide brown eyes meet mine, nod. “Let’s just forget about  .” 

still want  be angry, but have  let  anger go. 

We climb higher than I’ve gone before, until WilFs face goes white whenever   looks down. Most 
of the time like heights, so grab Will’s arm like need his support—but really,   lending him 
mine. He smiles gratefully at . 

Four turns around  walks backward a few steps—backward, on a narrow path with no railing. 
How well does   know this place? 

He eyes Drew, who trudges at the back of the group,  says, “Pick up the pace, Drew!” 

’s a cruel joke, but  ’s hard for   fight off a smile. That is, until Four’s eyes shift   arm 
around Will’s,  all the humor drains from them. His expression sends a chill through . Is  ... 
jealous? 

We get closer  closer  the glass ceiling,  for the first time in days, see the sun. Four walks 
up a flight of metal stairs leading through a hole in the ceiling. They creak under  feet,  look 
down  see the Pit  the chasm below  . 

We walk across the glass, which is now a floor rather than a ceiling, through a cylindrical room 
with glass walls. The surrounding buildings are half-collapsed  appear  be abandoned, which is 
probably why never noticed the Dauntless compound before. The Abnegation sector is also far away. 

The Dauntless mill around the glass room, talking in clusters. At the edge of the room, two 
Dauntless fight with sticks, laughing when one of them misses  hits only air. Above , two ropes 
stretch across the room, one a few feet higher than the other. They probably have something  do with 
the daredevil stunts the Dauntless are famous for. 



Four leads   through another door. Beyond   is a huge, dank space with graffitied walls  
exposed pipes. The room is lit by a series of old-fashioned fluorescent tubes with plastic covers—they 
must be ancient. 

“This,” says Four, his eyes bright in pale light, “is a different kind of simulation known as the fear 
landscape.  has been disabled for our purposes, so this isn’t what   will be like the next time  see 
 .” 

Behind him, the word “Dauntless” is spray-painted in red artistic lettering on a concrete wall. 

“Through your simulations, we have stored data about your worst fears. The fear landscape accesses 
that data  presents  with a series of virtual obstacles. Some of the obstacles will be fears  
previously faced in your simulations. Some may be new fears. The difference is that  are aware, in 
the fear landscape, that   is a simulation, so  will have all your wits about  as  go through 
 .” 

That means that everyone will be like Divergent in the fear landscape.  know if that’s a relief, 
because  ’t be detected, or a problem, because won’t have the advantage. 

Four continues, “The number of fears  have in your landscape varies according  how many  
have.” 

How many fears will have? think of facing the crows again  shiver, though the air is warm. 

“told  before that the third stage of initiation focuses on mental preparation,”   says. 
remember when   said that. On the first day. Right before   put a gun  Peter’s head. wish   had 
pulled the trigger. 

“That is because   requires   control both your emotions  your body—to combine the 
physical abilities  learned in stage one with the emotional mastery  learned in stage two. To 
keep a level head.” One of the fluorescent tubes above Four’s head twitches  flickers. Four stops 
scanning the crowd of initiates  focuses his stare on . 

“Next week  will go through your fear landscape as quickly as possible in front of a panel of 
Dauntless leaders. That will be your final test, which determines your ranking for stage three. Just as 
stage two of initiation is weighted more heavily than stage one, stage three is weighted heaviest of all. 
Understood?” 

We all nod. Even Drew, who makes   look painful. 

 do well in  final test, have a good chance of making   into the top ten  a good chance of 
becoming a member. Becoming Dauntless. The thought makes  almost giddy with relief. 

“You  get past each obstacle in one of two ways. Either  find a    calm down enough that 
the simulation registers a normal, steady heartbeat, or  find a    face your fear, which  
force the simulation  move on. One    face a fear of drowning is  swim deeper, for example.” 
Four shrugs. “So suggest that  take the next week  consider your fears  develop strategies  
face them.” 

“That doesn’t sound fair,” says Peter. “What if one person only has seven fears  someone else 
has twenty? That’s not their fault.” 

Four stares at him for a few seconds  then laughs. “Do  really want  talk   about 
what’s fair?” 

The crowd of initiates parts  make   for him as   walks toward Peter, folds his arms,  says, 
in a deadly voice, “understand why you’re worried, Peter. The events of last night certainly proved 
that  are a miserable coward.” 

Peter stares back, expressionless. 



“So now we all know,” says Four, quietly, “that  are afraid of a short, skinny girl from 
Abnegation.” His mouth curls in a smile. 

Will puts his arm around . Christina’s shoulders shake with suppressed laughter. And somewhere 
within , find a smile too. 

When we get back  the dorm that afternoon, A1 is there. 

Will stands behind   holds  shoulders—lightly, as if  remind  that  ’s there. 
Christina edges closer  . 

Al’s eyes have shadows beneath them,  his face is swollen from crying. Pain stabs  stomach 
when see him.  ’t move. The scent of lemongrass  sage, once pleasant, turns sour in  nose. 

“Tris,” says Al, his voice breaking. “Can talk  ?” 

“Are  kidding?” Will squeezes  shoulders. “You  get  come near her ever again.” 

“won’t hurt . never wanted ...” Al covers his face with both hands. “just want  say that 
  sorry,   so sorry, ... know what’s wrong with , ...please forgive , 
please....” 

He reaches for  like  ’s going  touch  shoulder, or  hand, his face wet with tears. 

Somewhere inside  is a merciful, forgiving person. Somewhere there is a girl who tries  
understand what people are going through, who accepts that people do evil things  that desperation 
leads them  darker places than they ever imagined. swear she exists,  she hurts for the repentant 
boy see in front of . 

But if saw her, wouldn’t recognize her. 

“Stay away from ,” say quietly. My body feels rigid  cold,  am not angry, am not hurt, 
am nothing. say,  voice low, “Never come near  again.” 

Our eyes meet. His are dark  glassy. am nothing. 

“  do, swear  God will kill ,” say. “You coward.” 

“This.” 

In  dream,  mother says  name. She beckons  ,  cross the kitchen  stand beside 
her. She points  the pot on the stove,  lift the lid  peek inside. The beady eye of a crow stares 
back at , its wing feathers pressed  the side of the pot, its fat body covered with boiling water. 

“Dinner,” she says. 

“Tris!” hear again. open  eyes. Christina stands next   bed, her cheeks streaked with 
mascara-tinted tears. 

“’s Al,” she says. “Come on.” 

Some of the other initiates are awake,  some aren’t. Christina grabs  hand  pulls  out of 
the dormitory. run barefoot over the stone floor, blinking clouds from  eyes,  limbs still heavy 
with sleep. Something terrible has happened. feel   with every thump of  heart. ’s Al. 

We run across the Pit floor,  then Christina stops. A crowd has gathered around the ledge, but 
everyone stands a few feet from one another, so there is enough space for   maneuver past 
Christina  around a tall, middle-aged man  the front. 

Two men stand next  the ledge, hoisting something up with ropes. They both grunt from the effort, 
heaving their weight back so the ropes slide over the railing,  then reaching forward  grab again. 
A huge, dark shape appears above the ledge,  a few Dauntless rush forward  help the two men 
haul   over. 

The shape falls with a thud on the Pit floor. A pale arm, swollen with water, flops onto the stone. A 
body. Christina pulls herself tight   side, clinging   arm. She turns her head into  shoulder 
 sobs, but  ’t look away. A few of the men turn the body over,  the head flops  the side. 

The eyes are open  empty. Dark. Doll’s eyes. And the nose has a high arch, a narrow bridge, a 
round tip. The lips are blue. The face itself is something other than human, half corpse  half 
creature. My lungs burn;  next breath rattles on the   in. Al. 

“One of the initiates,” says someone behind . “What happened?” 

“Same thing that happens every year,” someone else replies. “He pitched himself over the ledge.” 

“Don’t be so morbid. Could have been an accident.” 

“They found him in the middle of the chasm. You think   tripped over his shoelace ... 
whoopsies, just stumbled fifteen feet forward?” 

Christina’s hands get tighter  tighter around  arm. should tell her  let go of ;  ’s 
starting  hurt. Someone kneels next  Al’s face  pushes his eyelids shut. Trying  make   look 
like  ’s sleeping, maybe. Stupid. Why do people want  pretend that death is sleep?  isn’t.  isn’t. 

Something inside  collapses. My chest is so tight, suffocating,  ’t breathe. sink  the ground, 
dragging Christina down with . The stone is rough under  knees. hear something, a memory of 
sound. Al’s sobs; his screams at night. Should have known. Still  ’t breathe. press both palms  
 chest  rock back  forth  free the tension in  chest. 

When blink, see the top of Al’s head as   carries  on his back  the dining hall. feel the 
bounce of his footsteps. He is big  warm  clumsy. No, was. That is death—shifting from “is”  
“was.” 

wheeze. Someone has brought a large black bag  put the body in.  tell that   will be too 


small. A laugh rises in  throat  flops from  mouth, strained  gurgling. Al’s too big for the 
body bag; what a tragedy. Halfway through the laugh, clamp  mouth shut,    sounds more like 
a groan. pull  arm free  stand, leaving Christina on the ground. run. 

“Here  go,” Tori says. She hands  a steaming mug that smells like peppermint. hold   with 
both hands,  fingers prickling with warmth. 

She sits down across from . When   comes  funerals, the Dauntless  waste any time. Tori 
said they want  acknowledge death as soon as   happens. There are no people in the front room of 
the tattoo parlor, but the Pit is crawling with people, most of them drunk.  know why that 
surprises . 

At home, a funeral is a somber occasion. Everyone gathers  support the deceased’s family,  no 
one has idle hands, but there is no laughter, or shouting, or joking. And the Abnegation  drink 
alcohol, so everyone is sober.  makes sense that funerals would be the opposite here. 

“Drink  ,” she says. “ will make  feel better, promise.” 

“ think tea is the solution,” say slowly. But sip   anyway.  warms  mouth   
throat  trickles into  stomach. didn’t realize how deeply cold was until wasn’t anymore. 

“‘Better’ is the word used. Not ‘good.’” She smiles at , but the corners of her eyes  crinkle 
like they usually do. “ think ‘good’ will happen for a while.” 

bite  lip. “How long...” struggle for the right words. “How long did   take for   be okay 
again, after your brother...” 

“Don’t know.” She shakes her head. “Some days feel like   still not okay. Some days feel fine. 
Happy, even.  took  a few years  stop plotting revenge, though.” 

“Why did  stop?” ask. 

Her eyes go vacant as she stares at the wall behind . She taps her fingers against her leg for a few 
seconds  then says, “ think of   as stopping. More like  ...waiting for  opportunity.” 

She comes out of her daze  checks her watch. 

“Time  go,” she says. 

pour the rest of  tea down the sink. When lift  hand from the mug, realize that   
shaking. Not good. My hands usually shake before start  cry,   ’t cry in front of everyone. 

follow Tori out of the tattoo place  down the path  the Pit floor. All the people that were 
milling around earlier are gathered by the ledge now,  the air smells potently of alcohol. The 
woman in front of  lurches  the right, losing her balance,  then erupts into giggles as she falls 
against the man next  her. Tori grabs  arm  steers  away. 

find Uriah, Will,  Christina standing among the other initiates. Christina’s eyes are swollen. 
Uriah is holding a silver flask. He offers    . shake  head. 

“Surprise, surprise,” says Molly from behind . She nudges Peter with her elbow. “Once a Stiff, 
always a Stiff.” 

should ignore her. Her opinions shouldn’t matter  . 

“read an interesting article today,” she says, leaning closer   ear. “Something about your dad, 
 the real reason  left your old faction.” 

Defending myself isn’t the most important thing on  mind. But   is the easiest one  address. 

twist,   fist connects with her jaw. My knuckles sting from the impact.  remember 
deciding  punch her.  remember forming a fist. 

She lunges at , her hands outstretched, but she doesn’t get far. Will grabs her collar  pulls her 



back. He looks from her    says, “Quit  . Both of .” 

Part of  wishes that   hadn’t stopped her. A fight would be a welcome distraction, especially 
now that Eric is climbing onto a box next  the railing. face him, crossing  arms  keep myself 
steady. wonder what  ’ll say. 

In Abnegation no one has committed suicide in recent memory, but the faction’s stance on   is 
clear: Suicide,  them, is an act of selfishness. Someone who is truly selfless does not think of 
himself often enough  desire death. No one would say that aloud, if   happened, but everyone would 
think  . 

“Quiet down, everyone!” shouts Eric. Someone hits what sounds like a gong,  the shouts 
gradually stop, though the mutters . Eric says, “Thank . As  know, we’re here because 
Albert, an initiate, jumped into the chasm last night.” 

The mutters stop too, leaving just the rush of water in the chasm. 

“We do not know why,” says Eric, “and   would be easy  mourn the loss of him tonight. But we 
did not choose a life of ease when we became Dauntless. And the truth of   is...” Eric smiles.  
didn’t know him, would think that smile is genuine. But do know him. “The truth is, Albert is now 
exploring an unknown, uncertain place. He leaped into vicious waters  get there. Who among   is 
brave enough  venture into that darkness without knowing what lies beyond  ? Albert was not yet 
one of our members, but we  be assured that   was one of our bravest !” 

A cry rises from the center of the crowd,  a whoop. The Dauntless cheer at varying pitches, high 
 low, bright  deep. Their roar mimics the roar of the water. Christina takes the flask from Uriah 
 drinks. Will slides his arm around her shoulders  pulls her  his side. Voices fill  ears. 

“We will celebrate him now,  remember him always!” yells Eric. Someone hands him a dark 
bottle,    lifts  . “To Albert the Courageous!” 

“To Albert!” shouts the crowd. Arms lift all around ,  the Dauntless chant his name. “Albert! 
Al-bert! Al-bert!” They chant until his name no longer sounds like his name.  sounds like the primal 
scream of an ancient race. 

turn away from the railing. cannot stand this any longer. 

 know where   going. suspect that am not going anywhere at all, just away. walk down 
a dark hallway. At the end is the drinking fountain, bathed in the blue glow of the light above  . 

shake  head. Courageous? Courageous would have been admitting weakness  leaving 
Dauntless, no matter what shame accompanied  . Pride is what killed Al,    is the flaw in every 
Dauntless heart.  is in mine. 

“Tris.” 

A jolt goes through ,  turn around. Four stands behind , just inside the blue circle of light. 
 gives him an eerie look, shading his eye sockets  casting shadows under his cheekbones. 

“What are  doing here?” ask. “Shouldn’t  be paying your respects?” 

say   like   tastes bad  have  spit   out. 

“Shouldn’t ?”   says. He steps toward ,  see his eyes again. They look black in this 
light. 

“Can’t pay respect when   have any,” reply. feel a twinge of guilt  shake  head. “
didn’t mean that.” 

“Ah.” Judging by the look   gives ,   doesn’t believe .  blame him. 

“This is ridiculous,” say, heat rushing into  cheeks. “He throws himself off a ledge  Eric’s 



calling   brave? Eric, who tried  have  throw knives at Al’s head?” taste bile. Eric’s false 
smiles, his artificial words, his twisted ideals—they make  want  be sick. “He wasn’t brave! He 
was depressed  a coward    almost killed ! Is that the kind of thing we respect here?” 

“What do  want them  do?”   says. “Condemn him? Al’s already dead. He  ’t hear    
 ’s too late.” 

“’s not about Al,” snap. “’s about everyone watching! Everyone who now sees hurling 
themselves into the chasm as a viable option. mean, why not do   if everyone calls  a hero 
afterward? Why not do   if everyone will remember your name? ’s... ’t...” 

shake  head. My face burns   heart pounds,  try  keep myself under control, but 
 ’t. 

“This would never have happened in Abnegation!” almost shout. “None of  ! Never. This place 
warped him  ruined him,   care if saying that makes  a Stiff,  care,  
care!” 

Four’s eyes shift  the wall above the drinking fountain. 

“Careful, Tris,”   says, his eyes still on the wall. 

“Is that all   say?” demand, scowling at him. “That should be careful ? That’s  ?” 

“You’re as bad as the Candor,  know that?” He grabs  arm  drags  away from the 
drinking fountain. His hand hurts  arm, but   not strong enough  pull away. 

His face is so close  mine that  see a few freckles spotting his nose. “  not going  say this 
again, so listen carefully.” He sets his hands on  shoulders, his fingers pressing, squeezing. feel 
small. “They are watching . You, in particular.” 

“Let go of ,” say weakly. 

His fingers spring apart,    straightens. Some of the weight on  chest lifts now that   isn’t 
touching . fear his shifting moods. They show  something unstable inside of him,  
instability is dangerous. 

“Are they watching , too?” say, so quietly   wouldn’t be able  hear  if   wasn’t standing 
so close. 

He doesn’t answer  question. “keep trying  help ,”   says, “but  refuse  be helped.” 

“Oh, right. Your help,” say. “Stabbing  ear with a knife  taunting   yelling at  more 
than  yell at anyone else,   sure is helpful.” 

“Taunting ? You mean when threw the knives? wasn’t taunting ,”   snaps. “was 
reminding  that if  failed, someone else would have  take your place.” 

cup the back of  neck with  hand  think back  the knife incident. Every time   spoke, 
  was  remind  that if gave up, Al would have  take  place in front of the target. 

“Why?” say. 

“Because you’re from Abnegation,”   says, “and  ’s when you’re acting selflessly that  are at 
your bravest.” 

understand now. He wasn’t persuading   give up. He was reminding  why couldn’t— 
because needed  protect Al. The thought makes  ache now. Protect Al. My friend. My attacker. 

 ’t hate Al as much as want . 

 ’t forgive him either. 

“ were , would do a better job of pretending that selfless impulse is going away,”   says, 
“because if the wrong people discover  ...well,   won’t be good for .” 



“Why? Why do they care about  intentions?” 

“Intentions are the only thing they care about. They try  make  think they care about what  
do, but they . They  want   act a certain  . They want   think a certain  . So 
you’re easy  understand. So  won’t pose a threat  them.” He presses a hand  the wall next  
 head  leans into  . His shirt is just tight enough that  see his collarbone  the faint 
depression between his shoulder muscle  his bicep. 

wish was taller.  was tall,  narrow build would be described as “willowy” instead of 
“childish,”    might not see  as a little sister   needs  protect. 

 want him  see  as his sister. 

“ understand,” say, “why they care what think, as long as   acting how they want  
.” 

“You’re acting how they want   now,”   says, “but what happens when your Abnegation- 
wired brain tells   do something else, something they  want?” 

 have an answer  that,   even know if  ’s right about . Am wired like the 
Abnegation, or the Dauntless? 

Maybe the answer is neither. Maybe am wired like the Divergent. 

“might not need   help . Ever think about that?” say. “  not weak,  know.  do 
this on  own.” 

He shakes his head. “You think  first instinct is  protect . Because you’re small, or a girl, or 
a Stiff. But you’re wrong.” 

He leans his face close  mine  wraps his fingers around  chin. His hand smells like metal. 
When was the last time   held a gun, or a knife? My skin tingles at the point of contact, like  ’s 
transmitting electricity through his skin. 

“My first instinct is  push  until  break, just  see how hard have  press,”   says, his 
fingers squeezing at the word “break.” My body tenses at the edge in his voice, so am coiled as tight 
as a spring,  forget  breathe. 

His dark eyes lifting  mine,   adds, “But resist  .” 

“Why...” swallow hard. “Why is that your first instinct?” 

“Fear doesn’t shut  down;   wakes  up. I’ve seen  . ’s fascinating.” He releases  but 
doesn’t pull away, his hand grazing  jaw,  neck. “Sometimes just...want  see   again. Want 
 see  awake.” 

set  hands on his waist.  ’t remember deciding  do that. But also  ’t move away. pull 
myself against his chest, wrapping  arms around him. My fingers skim the muscles of his back. 

After a moment   touches the small of  back, pressing  closer,  smoothes his other hand 
over  hair. feel small again, but this time,   doesn’t scare . squeeze  eyes shut. He doesn’t 
scare  anymore. 

“Should be crying?” ask,  voice muffled by his shirt. “Is there something wrong with ?” 

The simulations drove a crack through A1 so wide   could not mend  . Why not ? Why am not 
like him—and why does that thought make  feel so uneasy, like   teetering on a ledge myself? 

“You think know anything about tears?”   says quietly. 

close  eyes.  expect Four  reassure ,    makes no effort , but feel better 
standing here than did out there among the people who are  friends,  faction. press  
forehead  his shoulder. 



“ had forgiven him,” say, “do  think   would be alive now?” 

“ know,”   replies. He presses his hand   cheek,  turn  face into  , keeping  
eyes closed. 

“feel like  ’s  fault.” 

“ isn’t your fault,”   says, touching his forehead  mine. 

“But should have. should have forgiven him.” 

“Maybe. Maybe there’s more we all could have done,”   says, “but we just have  let the guilt 
remind    do better next time.” 

frown  pull back. That is a lesson that members of Abnegation learn—guilt as a tool, rather 
than a weapon against the self.  is a line straight from one of  father’s lectures at our weekly 
meetings. 

“What faction did  come from, Four?” 

“ doesn’t matter,”   replies, his eyes lowered. “This is where am now. Something  would do 
well  remember for yourself.” 

He gives  a conflicted look  touches his lips   forehead, right between  eyebrows. 
close  eyes.  understand this, whatever   is. But  want  ruin  , so say nothing. He 
doesn’t move;   just stays there with his mouth pressed   skin,  stay there with  hands on 
his waist, for a long time. 

stand with Will  Christina at the railing overlooking the chasm, late at night after most of the 
Dauntless have gone  sleep. Both  shoulders sting from the tattoo needle. We all got new tattoos a 
half hour ago. 

Tori was the only one in the tattoo place, so felt safe getting the symbol of Abnegation—a pair of 
hands, palms up as if  help someone stand, bounded by a circle—on  right shoulder. know   was 
a risk, especially after all that’s happened. But that symbol is a part of  identity,    felt 
important   that wear   on  skin. 

step up on one of the barrier’s crossbars, pressing  hips  the railing  keep  balance. This 
is where A1 stood. look down into the chasm, at the black water, at the jagged rocks. Water hits the 
wall  sprays up, misting  face. Was   afraid when   stood here? Or was   so determined  
jump that   was easy? 

Christina hands  a stack of paper. got a copy of every report the Erudite have released in the 
last six months. Throwing them into the chasm won’t get rid of them forever, but   might make  
feel better. 

stare at the first one. On   is a picture of Jeanine, the Erudite representative. Her sharp-but- 
attractive eyes stare back at . 

“Have  ever met her?” ask Will. Christina crumples the first report into a ball  hurls   into 
the water. 

“Jeanine? Once,”   replies. He takes the next report  tears    shreds. The pieces float into the 
river. He does   without Christina’s malice. get the feeling that the only reason  ’s participating is 
 prove   that   doesn’t agree with his former faction’s tactics. Whether   believes what 
they’re saying or not is unclear,  am afraid  ask. 

“Before she was a leader, she worked with  sister. They were trying  develop a longer-lasting 
serum for the simulations,”   says. “Jeanine’s so smart   see   even before she says anything. 
Like...a walking, talking computer.” 

“What...” fling one of the pages over the railing, pressing  lips together. should just ask. 
“What do  think of what she has  say?” 

He shrugs. “ know. Maybe  ’s a good idea  have more than one faction in control of the 
government. And maybe   would be nice if we had more cars .. .fresh fruit ...” 

“You do realize there’s no secret warehouse where all that stuff is kept, right?” ask,  face 
getting hot. 

“Yes, do,”   says. “just think that comfort  prosperity are not a priority for Abnegation,  
maybe they would be if the other factions were involved in our decision making.” 

“Because giving an Erudite boy a car is more important than giving food  the factionless,” snap. 

“Hey now,” says Christina, brushing Will’s shoulder with her fingers. “This is supposed  be a 
lighthearted session of symbolic document destruction, not a political debate.” 

bite back what was about  say  stare at the stack of paper in  hands. Will  Christina 
share a lot of idle touches lately. I’ve noticed  . Have they? 

“All that stuff she said about your dad, though,”   says, “makes  kind of hate her.  ’t 
imagine what good  come of saying such terrible things.” 


.  Jeanine  make people believe that  father  all the other Abnegation leaders are 
corrupt  awful, she has support for whatever revolution she wants  start, if that’s really her plan. 
But  want  argue again, so just nod  throw the remaining sheets into the chasm. They 
drift back  forth, back  forth until they find the water. They will be filtered out at the chasm 
wall  discarded. 

“’s bedtime,” Christina says, smiling. “Ready  go back? think want  put Peter’s hand in a 
bowl of warm water  make him pee tonight.” 

turn away from the chasm  see movement on the right side of the Pit. A figure climbs toward 
the glass ceiling,  judging by the smooth     walks, like his feet barely leave the ground, 
know   is Four. 

“That sounds great, but have  talk  Four about something,” say, pointing toward the shadow 
ascending the path. Her eyes follow  hand. 

“Are  sure  should be running around here alone at night?” she asks. 

“won’t be alone. I’ll be with Four.” bite  lip. 

Christina is looking at Will,    is looking back at her. Neither of them is really listening  . 

“All right,” Christina says distantly. “Well, I’ll see  later, then.” 

Christina  Will walk toward the dormitories, Christina tousling Will’s hair  Will jabbing her 
in the ribs. For a second, watch them. feel like am witnessing the beginning of something, but   
not sure what   will be. 

jog  the path on the right side of the Pit  start  climb. try  make  footsteps as quiet as 
possible. Unlike Christina,  find   difficult  lie.  intend  talk  Four—at least, not 
until find out where  ’s going, late at night, in the glass building above  . 

run quietly, breathless when reach the stairs,  stand at one end of the glass room while Four 
stands at the other. Through the windows see the city lights, glowing now but petering out even as 
look at them. They are supposed  turn off at midnight. 

Across the room, Four stands at the door  the fear landscape. He holds a black box in one hand  
a syringe in the other. 

“Since you’re here,”   says, without looking over his shoulder, “you might as well go in with .” 

bite  lip. “Into your fear landscape?” 

“Yes.” 

As walk toward him, ask, “  do that?” 

“The serum connects   the program,”   says, “but the program determines whose landscape 
 go through. And right now,  ’s set  put   through mine.” 

“You would let  see that?” 

“Why else do  think   going in?”   asks quietly. He doesn’t lift his eyes. “There are some 
things want  show .” 

He holds up the syringe,  tilt  head  better expose  neck. feel sharp pain when the 
needle goes in, but am used    now. When  ’s done,   offers  the black box. In   is another 
syringe. 

“I’ve never done this before,” say as take   out of the box.  want  hurt him. 

“Right here,”   says, touching a spot on his neck with his fingernail. stand on  tiptoes  push 
the needle in,  hand shaking a little. He doesn’t even flinch. 

He keeps his eyes on  the whole time,  when   done, puts both syringes in the box  sets 



  by the door. He knew that would follow him up here. Knew, or hoped. Either   is fine with . 

He offers  his hand,  slide mine into  . His fingers are cold  brittle. feel like there is 
something should say, but am too stunned   ’t come up with any words. He opens the door 
with his free hand,  follow him into the dark. am now used  entering unknown places without 
hesitation. keep  breaths even  hold firmly  Four’s hand. 

“See if   figure out why they call  Four,”   says. 

The door clicks shut behind  , taking all the light with  . The air is cold in the hallway; feel each 
particle enter  lungs. inch closer  him so  arm is against his   chin is near his shoulder. 

“What’s your real name?” ask. 

“See if   figure that out too.” 

The simulation takes  . The ground stand on is no longer made of cement.  creaks like metal. 
Fight pours in from all angles,  the city unfolds around  , glass buildings  the arc of train 
tracks,  we are high above  . haven’t seen a blue sky in a long time, so when   spreads out above 
, feel the breath catch in  lungs  the effect is dizzying. 

Then the wind starts.  blows so hard have  lean against Four  stay on  feet. He removes his 
hand from mine  wraps his arm around  shoulders instead. At first think  ’s  protect me— 
but no,  ’s having trouble breathing    needs   steady him. He forces breath in  out 
through an open mouth  his teeth are clenched. 

The height is beautiful  , but if  ’s here,   is one of his worst nightmares. 

“We have  jump off, right?” shout over the wind. 

He nods. 

“On three, okay?” 

Another nod. 

“One...two...three!” pull him with  as burst into a run. After we take the first step, the rest is 
easy. We both sprint off the edge of the building. We fall like two stones, fast, the air pushing back at 
 , the ground growing beneath  . Then the scene disappears,  am on  hands  knees on the 
floor, grinning. loved that rush the day chose Dauntless,  love   now. 

Next  , Four gasps  presses a hand  his chest. 

get up  help him  his feet. “What’s next?” 

“’s—” 

Something solid hits  spine. slam into Four,  head hitting his collarbone. Walls appear on 
 left   right. The space is so narrow that Four has  pull his arms into his chest  fit. A 
ceiling slams onto the walls around   with a crack,  Four hunches over, groaning. The room is just 
big enough  accommodate his size,  no bigger. 

“Confinement,” say. 

He makes a guttural noise. tilt  head  pull back enough  look at him.  barely see his 
face,  ’s so dark,  the air is close; we share breaths. He grimaces like  ’s in pain. 

“Hey,” say. “’s okay. Here—” 

guide his arms around  body so   has more space. He clutches at  back  puts his face 
next  mine, still hunched over. His body is warm, but feel only his bones  the muscle that wraps 
around them; nothing yields beneath . My cheeks get hot. Can   tell that   still built like a 
child? 

“This is the first time   happy   so small.” laugh.  joke, maybe  calm him down. And 



distract myself. 

“Mmhmm,”   says. His voice sounds strained. 

“We  ’t break out of here,” say. “’s easier  face the fear head on, right?”  wait for a 
response. “So what  need  do is make the space smaller. Make   worse so   gets better. Right?” 

“Yes.”  is a tight, tense little word. 

“Okay. We’ll have  crouch, then. Ready?” 

squeeze his waist  pull him down with . feel the hard line of his rib against  hand  
hear the screech of one wood plank against another as the ceiling inches down with  . realize that 
we won’t fit with all this space between  , so turn  curl into a ball,  spine against his chest. 
One of his knees is bent next   head  the other is curled beneath  so   sitting on his ankle. 
We are a jumble of limbs. feel a harsh breath against  ear. 

“Ah,”   says, his voice raspy. “This is worse. This is definitely...” 

“Shh,” say. “Arms around .” 

Obediently,   slips both arms around  waist. smile at the wall. am not enjoying this. am 
not, not even a little bit, no. 

“The simulation measures your fear response,” say softly.   just repeating what   told  , but 
reminding him might help him. “So if   calm your heartbeat down,   will move on  the next 
one. Remember? So try  forget that we’re here.” 

“Yeah?” feel his lips move against  ear as   speaks,  heat courses through . “That easy, 
huh?” 

“You know, most boys would enjoy being trapped in close quarters with a girl.” roll  eyes. 

“Not claustrophobic people, Tris!” He sounds desperate now. 

“Okay, okay.” set  hand on top of his  guide     chest, so  ’s right over  heart. “Feel 
 heartbeat. Can  feel  ?” 

“Yes.” 

“Feel how steady   is?” 

“’s fast.” 

“Yes, well, that has nothing  do with the box.” wince as soon as   done speaking. just 
admitted  something. Hopefully   doesn’t realize that. “Every time  feel  breathe,  
breathe. Focus on that.” 

“Okay.” 

breathe deeply,  his chest rises  falls with mine. After a few seconds of this, say calmly, 
“Why   tell  where this fear comes from. Maybe talking about   will help  ...somehow.” 

 know how, but   sounds right. 

“Um...okay.” He breathes with  again. “This one is from  fantastic childhood. Childhood 
punishments. The tiny closet upstairs.” 

press  lips together. remember being punished—sent   room without dinner, deprived of 
this or that, firm scoldings. was never shut in a closet. The cruelty smarts;  chest aches for him. 
 know what  say, so try  keep   casual. 

“My mother kept our winter coats in our closet.” 

“...” He gasps. “ really want  talk about   anymore.” 

“Okay. Then... talk. Ask  something.” 

“Okay.” He laughs shakily in  ear. “Why is your heart racing, Tris?” 



cringe  say, “Well, ...” search for an excuse that doesn’t involve his arms being around . 
“barely know .” Not good enough. “barely know     crammed up against  in a box, 
Four, what do  think?” 

“ we were in your fear landscape,”   says, “would be in  ?” 

“  not afraid of .” 

“Of course you’re not. But that’s not what meant.” 

He laughs again,  when   does, the walls break apart with a crack  fall away, leaving   in a 
circle of light. Four sighs  lifts his arms from  body. scramble   feet  brush myself off, 
though haven’t accumulated any dirt that   aware of. wipe  palms on  jeans. My back feels 
cold from the sudden absence of him. 

He stands in front of . He’s grinning,    not sure like the look in his eyes. 

“Maybe  were cut out for Candor,”   says, “because you’re a terrible liar.” 

“think  aptitude test ruled that one out pretty well.” 

He shakes his head. “The aptitude test tells  nothing.” 

narrow  eyes. “What are  trying  tell ? Your test isn’t the reason  ended up 
Dauntless?” 

Excitement runs through  like the blood in  veins, propelled by the hope that   might 
confirm that   is Divergent, that   is like , that we  figure out what   means together. 

“Not exactly, no,”   says. “I...” 

He looks over his shoulder  his voice trails off. A woman stands a few yards away, pointing a 
gun at  . She is completely still, her features plain—if we walked away right now, would not 
remember her. To  right, a table appears. On   is a gun  a single bullet. Why isn’t she shooting 
 ? 

Oh, think. The fear is unrelated  the threat  his life.  has  do with the gun on the table. 

“You have  kill her,” say softly. 

“Every single time.” 

“She isn’t real.” 

“She looks real.” He bites his lip. “ feels real.” 

“ she was real, she would have killed  already.” 

“’s okay.” He nods. “I’ll just...do  . This one’s not...not so bad. Not as much panic involved.” 

Not as much panic, but far more dread.  see   in his eyes as   picks up the gun  opens the 
chamber like  ’s done   a thousand times—and maybe   has. He clicks the bullet into the chamber 
 holds the gun out in front of him, both hands around  . He squeezes one eye shut  breathes 
slowly in. 

As   exhales,   fires,  the woman’s head whips back. see a flash of red  look away. hear 
her crumple  the floor. 

Four’s gun drops with a thump. We stare at her fallen body. What   said is true—  does feel real. 
Don’t be ridiculous. grab his arm. 

“C’mon,” say. “Let’s go. Keep moving.” 

After another tug,   comes out of his daze  follows . As we pass the table, the woman’s body 
disappears, except in  memory  his. What would   be like  kill someone every time went 
through  landscape? Maybe I’ll find out. 

But something puzzles : These are supposed  be Four’s worst fears. And though   panicked in 



the box  on the roof,   killed the woman without much difficulty.  seems like the simulation is 
grasping at any fears    find within him,    hasn’t found much. 

“Here we go,”   whispers. 

A dark figure moves ahead of  , creeping along the edge of the circle of light, waiting for    
take another step. Who is  ? Who frequents Four’s nightmares? 

The man who emerges is tall  slim, with hair cut close  his scalp. He holds his hands behind 
his back. And   wears the gray clothes of the Abnegation. 

“Marcus,” whisper. 

“Here’s the part,” Four says, his voice shaking, “where  figure out  name.” 

“Is  ...” look from Marcus, who walks slowly toward  ,  Four, who inches slowly back,  
everything comes together. Marcus had a son who joined Dauntless. His name was...“Tobias.” 

Marcus shows   his hands. A belt is curled around one of his fists. Slowly   unwinds   from his 
fingers. 

“This is for your own good,”   says,  his voice echoes a dozen times. 

A dozen Marcuses press into the circle of light, all holding the same belt, with the same blank 
expression. When the Marcuses blink again, their eyes turn into empty, black pits. The belts slither 
along the floor, which is now white tile. A shiver crawls up  spine. The Erudite accused Marcus of 
cruelty. For once the Erudite were right. 

look at Four—Tobias—and   seems frozen. His posture sags. He looks years older;   looks 
years younger. The first Marcus yanks his arm back, the belt sailing over his shoulder as   prepares 
 strike. Tobias shrinks back, throwing his arms up  protect his face. 

dart in front of him  the belt cracks against  wrist, wrapping around  . A hot pain races up 
 arm   elbow. grit  teeth  pull as hard as . Marcus loses his grip, so unwrap the 
belt  grab   by the buckle. 

swing  arm as fast as ,  shoulder socket burning from the sudden motion,  the belt 
strikes Marcus’s shoulder. He yells  lunges at  with outstretched hands, with fingernails that 
look like claws. Tobias pushes  behind him so   stands between   Marcus. He looks angry, 
not afraid. 

All the Marcuses vanish. The lights come on, revealing a long, narrow room with busted brick walls 
 a cement floor. 

“That’s  ?” say. “Those were your worst fears? Why do  only have four...” My voice trails 
off. Only four fears. 

“Oh.” look over  shoulder at him. “That’s why they call you—” 

The words leave  when see his expression. His eyes are wide  seem almost vulnerable under 
the room’s lights. His lips are parted.  we were not here, would describe the look as awe. But 
 understand why   would be looking at  in awe. 

He wraps his hand around  elbow, his thumb pressing  the soft skin above  forearm,  
tugs  toward him. The skin around  wrist still stings, like the belt was real, but   is as pale as the 
rest of . His lips slowly move against  cheek, then his arms tighten around  shoulders,    
buries his face in  neck, breathing against  collarbone. 

stand stiffly for a second  then loop  arms around him  sigh. 

“Hey,” say softly. “We got through  .” 

He lifts his head  slips his fingers through  hair, tucking   behind  ear. We stare at each 



other in silence. His fingers move absently over a lock of  hair. 

“You got  through  ,”   says finally. 

“Well.” My throat is dry. try  ignore the nervous electricity that pulses through  every second 
  touches . “’s easy  be brave when they’re not  fears.” 

let  hands drop  casually wipe them on  jeans, hoping   doesn’t notice. 

   does,   doesn’t say so. He laces his fingers with mine. 

“Come on,”   says. “have something else  show .” 

Hand in hand, we walk toward the Pit. monitor the pressure of  hand carefully. One minute, 
feel like   not gripping hard enough,  the next,   squeezing too hard. never used  
understand why people bothered  hold hands as they walked, but then   runs one of his fingertips 
down  palm,  shiver  understand   completely. 

“So...” latch on  the last logical thought remember. “Four fears.” 

“Four fears then; four fears now,”   says, nodding. “They haven’t changed, so keep going in 
there, but...still haven’t made any progress.” 

“You  ’t be fearless, remember?” say. “Because  still care about things. About your life.” 

“know.” 

We walk along the edge of the Pit on a narrow path that leads  the rocks at the bottom of the 
chasm. I’ve never noticed   before—  blended in with the rock wall. But Tobias seems  know   
well. 

 want  ruin the moment, but have  know about his aptitude test. have  know if  ’s 
Divergent. 

“You were going  tell  about your aptitude test results,” say. 

“Ah.” He scratches the back of his neck with his free hand. “Does   matter?” 

“Yes. want  know.” 

“How demanding  are.” He smiles. 

We reach the end of the path  stand at the bottom of the chasm, where the rocks form unsteady 
ground, rising up at harsh angles from the rushing water. He leads  up  down, across small gaps 
 over angular ridges. My shoes cling  the rough rock. The soles of  shoes mark each rock with 
a wet footprint. 

He finds a relatively flat rock near the side, where the current isn’t strong,  sits down, his feet 
dangling over the edge. sit beside him. He seems comfortable here, inches above the hazardous 
water. 

He releases  hand. look at the jagged edge of the rock. 

“These are things  tell people,  know. Not even  friends,”   says. 

lace  fingers together  clench. This is the perfect place for him  tell  that   is 
Divergent, if indeed that’s what   is. The roar of the chasm ensures that we won’t be overheard. 
 know why the thought makes  so nervous. 

“My result was as expected,”   says. “Abnegation.” 

“Oh.” Something inside  deflates. am wrong about him. 

But—had assumed that if   was not Divergent,   must have gotten a Dauntless result. And 
technically, also got an Abnegation result—according  the system. Did the same thing happen  
him? And if that’s true, why isn’t   telling  the truth? 

“But  chose Dauntless anyway?” say. 

“Out of necessity.” 

“Why did  have  leave?” 

His eyes dart away from mine, across the space in front of him, as if searching the air for an answer. 
He doesn’t need  give one. still feel the ghost of a stinging belt on  wrist. 


“You had  get away from your dad,” say. “Is that why   want  be a Dauntless leader? 
Because if  were,  might have  see him again?” 

He lifts a shoulder. “That,  I’ve always felt that  quite belong among the Dauntless. Not 
the   they are now, anyway.” 

“But you’re...incredible,” say. pause  clear  throat. “mean, by Dauntless standards. Four 
fears is unheard of. How could  not belong here?” 

He shrugs. He doesn’t seem  care about his talent, or his status among the Dauntless,  that is 
what would expect from the Abnegation. am not sure what  make of that. 

He says, “have a theory that selflessness  bravery aren’t all that different. All your life you’ve 
been training  forget yourself, so when you’re in danger,   becomes your first instinct. could 
belong in Abnegation just as easily.” 

Suddenly feel heavy. A lifetime of training wasn’t enough for . My first instinct is still self- 
preservation. 

“Yeah, well,” say, “left Abnegation because wasn’t selfless enough, no matter how hard tried 
 be.” 

“That’s not entirely true.” He smiles at . “That girl who let someone throw knives at her  spare 
a friend, who hit  dad with a belt  protect me—that selfless girl, that’s not ?” 

He’s figured out more about  than have. And even though   seems impossible that   could feel 
something for , given all that   not...maybe   isn’t. frown at him. “You’ve been paying close 
attention, haven’t ?” 

“like  observe people.” 

“Maybe  were cut out for Candor, Four, because you’re a terrible liar.” 

He puts his hand on the rock next  him, his fingers lining up with mine. look down at our hands. 
He has long, narrow fingers. Hands made for fine, deft movements. Not Dauntless hands, which 
should be thick  tough  ready  break things. 

“Fine.” He leans his face closer  mine, his eyes focusing on  chin,   lips,   nose. “
watched  because like .” He says   plainly, boldly,  his eyes flick up  mine. “And  
call  'Four,’ okay? ’s nice  hear  name again.” 

Just like that,   has finally declared himself,   know how  respond. My cheeks warm, 
 all  think  say is, “But you’re older than am... Tobias.” 

He smiles at . “Yes, that whopping two-year gap really is insurmountable, isn’t  ?” 

“  not trying  be self-deprecating,” say, “just  get  .   younger.   not pretty. I—” 

He laughs, a deep laugh that sounds like   came from deep inside him,  touches his lips   
temple. 

“Don’t pretend,” say breathily. “You know   not.   not ugly, but am certainly not pretty.” 

“Fine. You’re not pretty. So?” He kisses  cheek. “like how  look. You’re deadly smart. 
You’re brave. And even though  found out about Marcus...” His voice softens. “You aren’t giving 
 that look. Like   a kicked puppy or something.” 

“Well,” say. “You’re not.” 

For a second his dark eyes are on mine,   ’s quiet. Then   touches  face  leans in close, 
brushing  lips with his. The river roars  feel its spray on  ankles. He grins  presses his 
mouth  mine. 

tense up at first, unsure of myself, so when   pulls away,   sure did something wrong, or 



badly. But   takes  face in his hands, his fingers strong against  skin,  kisses  again, 
firmer this time, more certain. wrap an arm around him, sliding  hand up his neck  into his 
short hair. 

For a few minutes we kiss, deep in the chasm, with the roar of water all around  . And when we 
rise, hand in hand, realize that if we had both chosen differently, we might have ended up doing the 
same thing, in a safer place, in gray clothes instead of black ones. 

The next morning am silly  light. Every time push the smile from  face,   fights its   
back. Eventually stop suppressing  . let  hair hang loose  abandon  uniform of loose 
shirts in favor of one that cuts across  shoulders, revealing  tattoos. 

“What is   with  today?” says Christina on the    breakfast. Her eyes are still swollen from 
sleep  her tangled hair forms a fuzzy halo around her face. 

“Oh,  know,” say. “Sun shining. Birds chirping.” 

She raises an eyebrow at , as if reminding  that we are in an underground tunnel. 

“Let the girl be in a good mood,” Will says. “You may never see   again.” 

smack his arm  hurry toward the dining hall. My heart pounds because know that at some 
point in the next half hour, will see Tobias. sit down in  usual place, next  Uriah, with Will  
Christina across from  . The seat on  left stays empty. wonder if Tobias will sit in  ; if  ’ll grin 
at  over breakfast; if  ’ll look at  in that secret, stolen   that imagine myself looking at 
him. 

grab a piece of toast from the plate in the middle of the table  start  butter   with a little too 
much enthusiasm. feel myself acting like a lunatic, but  ’t stop.  would be like refusing  
breathe. 

Then   walks in. His hair is shorter,    looks darker this  , almost black. ’s Abnegation 
short, realize. smile at him  lift  hand  wave him over, but   sits down next  Zeke 
without even glancing in  direction, so let  hand drop. 

stare at  toast.  is easy not  smile now. 

“Something wrong?” asks Uriah through a mouthful of toast. 

shake  head  take a bite. What did expect? Just because we kissed doesn’t mean anything 
changes. Maybe   changed his mind about liking . Maybe   thinks kissing  was a mistake. 

“Today’s fear landscape day,” says Will. “You think we’ll get  see our own fear landscapes?” 

“No.” Uriah shakes his head. “You go through one of the instructors’ landscapes. My brother told 
.” 

“Ooh, which instructor?” says Christina, suddenly perking up. 

“You know,   really isn’t fair that  all get insider information  we ,” Will says, glaring 
at Uriah. 

“Like  wouldn’t use an advantage if  had one,” retorts Uriah. 

Christina ignores them. “hope  ’s Four’s landscape.” 

“Why?” ask. The question comes out too incredulous. bite  lip  wish could take   back. 

“Looks like someone had a mood swing.” She rolls her eyes. “Like   want  know what his 
fears are. He acts so tough that  ’s probably afraid of marshmallows  really bright sunrises or 
something. Overcompensating.” 

shake  head. “ won’t be him.” 

“How would  know?” 

“’s just a prediction.” 

remember Tobias’s father in his fear landscape. He wouldn’t let everyone see that. glance at him. 
For a second, his eyes shift  mine. His stare is unfeeling. Then   looks away. 


Lauren, the instructor of the Dauntless-born initiates, stands with her hands on her hips outside the 
fear landscape room. 

“Two years ago,” she says, “was afraid of spiders, suffocation, walls that inch slowly inward  
trap  between them, getting thrown out of Dauntless, uncontrollable bleeding, getting run over by a 
train,  father’s death, public humiliation,  kidnapping by men without faces.” 

Everyone stares blankly at her. 

“Most of  will have anywhere from ten  fifteen fears in your fear landscapes. That is the 
average number,” she says. 

“What’s the lowest number someone has gotten?” asks Lynn. 

“In recent years,” says Lauren, “four.” 

have not looked at Tobias since we were in the cafeteria, but  ’t help but look at him now. He 
keeps his eyes trained on the floor. knew that four was a low number, low enough  merit a 
nickname, but didn’t know   was less than half the average. 

glare at  feet. He’s exceptional. And now   won’t even look at . 

“You will not find out your number today,” says Lauren. “The simulation is set   fear 
landscape program, so  will experience  fears instead of your own.” 

give Christina a pointed look. was right; we won’t go through Four’s landscape. 

“For the purposes of this exercise, though, each of  will only face one of  fears,  get a sense 
for how the simulation works.” 

Lauren points    at random  assigns   each a fear. was standing in the back, so will go 
close  last. The fear that she assigned   was kidnapping. 

Because   not hooked up  the computer as wait,  ’t watch the simulation, only the 
person’s reaction   .  is the perfect    distract myself from  preoccupation with Tobias— 
clenching  hands into fists as Will brushes off spiders  ’t see  Uriah presses his hands 
against walls that are invisible  ,  smirking as Peter turns bright red during whatever   
experiences in “public humiliation.” Then  ’s  turn. 

The obstacle won’t be comfortable for , but because have been able  manipulate every 
simulation, not just this one,  because have already gone through Tobias’s landscape, am not 
apprehensive as Lauren inserts the needle into  neck. 

Then the scenery changes  the kidnapping begins. The ground turns into grass beneath  feet, 
 hands clamp around  arms, over  mouth.  is too dark  see. 

stand next  the chasm. hear the roar of the water. scream into the hand that covers  mouth 
 thrash  free myself, but the arms are too strong;  kidnappers are too strong. The image of 
myself falling into darkness flashes into  mind, the same image that now carry with  in  
nightmares. scream again; scream until  throat hurts  squeeze hot tears from  eyes. 

knew they would come back for ; knew they would try again. The first time was not enough. 
scream again—not for help, because no one will help , but because that’s what  do when you’re 
about  die    ’t stop  . 

“Stop,” a stern voice says. 

The hands disappear,  the lights come on. stand on cement in the fear landscape room. My 
body shakes,  drop   knees, pressing  hands   face. just failed. lost all logic, lost 
all sense. Lauren’s fear transformed into one of  own. 

And everyone saw . Tobias saw . 



hear footsteps. Tobias marches toward   wrenches    feet. 

“What the hell was that, Stiff?” 

“I...” My breath comes in a hiccup. “didn’t—” 

“Get yourself together! This is pathetic.” 

Something within  snaps. My tears stop. Heat races through  body, driving the weakness out 
of ,  smack him so hard  knuckles burn with the impact. He stares at , one side of his 
face bright with blush-blood,  stare back. 

“Shut up,” say. yank  arm from his grasp  walk out of the room. 

pull  jacket tight around  shoulders. haven’t been outside in a long time. The sun shines pale 
against  face,  watch  breaths form in the air. 

At least accomplished one thing: convinced Peter  his friends that   no longer a threat. 
just have  make sure that tomorrow, when go through  own fear landscape, prove them wrong. 
Yesterday failure seemed impossible. Today   not sure. 

slide  hands through  hair. The impulse  cry is gone. braid  hair  tie   with the 
rubber band around  wrist. feel more like myself. That is all need:  remember who am. And 
am someone who does not let inconsequential things like boys  near-death experiences stop her. 

laugh, shaking  head. Am ? 

hear the train horn. The train tracks loop around the Dauntless compound  then continue farther 
than  see. Where do they begin? Where do they end? What is the world like beyond them? walk 
toward them. 

want  go home, but  ’t. Eric warned   not  appear too attached  our parents on Visiting 
Day, so visiting home would be betraying the Dauntless,   ’t afford  do that. Eric did not tell 
  we couldn’t visit people in factions other than the ones we came from, though,   mother did 
tell   visit Caleb. 

know   not allowed  leave without supervision, but  ’t stop myself. walk faster  
faster, until   sprinting. Pumping  arms, run alongside the last car until  grab the handle 
 swing myself in, wincing as pain darts through  sore body. 

Once in the car, lie on  back next  the door  watch the Dauntless compound disappear 
behind .  want  go back, but choosing  quit,  be factionless, would be the bravest thing 
have ever done,  today feel like a coward. 

The air rushes over  body  twists around  fingers. let  hand trail over the edge of the 
car so   presses against the wind.  ’t go home, but  find part of  . Caleb has a place in every 
memory of  childhood;   is part of  foundation. 

The train slows as   reaches the heart of the city,  sit up  watch the smaller buildings grow 
into larger buildings. The Erudite live in large stone buildings that overlook the marsh. hold the 
handle  lean out just enough  see where the tracks go. They dip down  street level just before 
they bend  travel east. breathe in the smell of wet pavement  marsh air. 

The train dips  slows,  jump. My legs shudder with the force of  landing,  run a few 
steps  regain  balance. walk down the middle of the street, heading south, toward the marsh. The 
empty land stretches as far as  see, a brown plane colliding with the horizon. 

turn left. The Erudite buildings loom above , dark  unfamiliar. How will find Caleb here? 

The Erudite keep records;  ’s in their nature. They must keep records of their initiates. Someone 
has access  those records; just have  find them. scan the buildings. Logically speaking, the 
central building should be the most important one. may as well start there. 

The faction members are milling around everywhere. Erudite faction norms dictate that a faction 
member must wear at least one blue article of clothing at a time, because blue causes the body  
release calming chemicals,  “a calm mind is a clear mind.” The color has also come  signify their 
faction.  seems impossibly bright   now. have grown used  dim lighting  dark clothing. 


expect  weave through the crowd, dodging elbows  muttering “excuse me” the   always 
do, but there is no need. Becoming Dauntless has made  noticeable. The crowd parts for ,  
their eyes cling   as pass. pull the rubber band from  hair  shake   from its knot before 
walk through the front doors. 

stand just inside the entrance  tilt  head back. The room is huge, silent,  smells like dust- 
covered pages. The wood-paneled floor creaks beneath  feet. Bookcases line the walls on either 
side of , but they seem  be decorative more than anything, because computers occupy the tables 
in the center of the room,  no one is reading. They stare at screens with tense eyes, focused. 

should have known that the main Erudite building would be a library. A portrait on the opposite 
wall catches  attention.  is twice  height  four times  width  depicts an attractive 
woman with watery gray eyes  spectacles—Jeanine. Heat licks  throat at the sight of her. 
Because she is Erudite’s representative, she is the one who released that report about  father. have 
disliked her since  father’s dinner-table rants began, but now hate her. 

Beneath her is a large plaque that reads knowledge leads  prosperity. 

Prosperity. To  the word has a negative connotation. Abnegation uses    describe self- 
indulgence. 

How could Caleb have chosen  be one of these people? The things they do, the things they want, 
 ’s all wrong. But   probably thinks the same of the Dauntless. 

walk up  the desk just beneath Jeanine’s portrait. The young man sitting behind   doesn’t look 
up as   says, “How  help ?” 

“am looking for someone,” say. “His name is Caleb. Do  know where  find him?” 

“am not permitted  give out personal information,”   replies blandly, as   jabs at the screen in 
front of him. 

“He’s  brother.” 

“am not permi—” 

slam  palm on the desk in front of him,    jerks out of his daze, staring at  over his 
spectacles. Heads turn in  direction. 

“said.” My voice is terse. “am looking for someone. He’s an initiate. Can  at least tell  
where  find them?” 

“Beatrice?” a voice behind  says. 

turn,  Caleb stands behind , a book in hand. His hair has grown out so   flips at his ears,  
  wears a blue T-shirt  a pair of rectangular glasses. Even though   looks different    not 
allowed  love him anymore, run at him as fast as   throw  arms around his shoulders. 

“You have a tattoo,”   says, his voice muffled. 

“You have glasses,” say. pull back  narrow  eyes. “Your vision is perfect, Caleb, what are 
 doing?” 

“Um...” He glances at the tables around  . “Come on. Let’s get out of here.” 

We exit the building  cross the street. have  jog  keep up with him. Across from Erudite 
headquarters is what used  be a park. Now we just call   “Millenium,”    is a stretch of bare land 
 several rusted metal sculptures—one an abstract, plated mammoth, another shaped like a lima 
bean that dwarfs  in size. 

We stop on the concrete around the metal bean, where the Erudite sit in small groups with 
newspapers or books. He takes off his glasses  shoves them in his pocket, then runs a hand through 



his hair, his eyes skipping over mine nervously. Like  ’s ashamed. Maybe should be too.   
tattooed, loose-haired,  wearing tight clothes. But   just not. 

“What are  doing here?”   says. 

“wanted  go home,” say, “and  were the closest thing could think of.” 

He presses his lips together. 

“Don’t look so pleased  see ,” add. 

“Hey,”   says, setting his hands on  shoulders. “  thrilled  see , okay? ’s just that this 
isn’t allowed. There are rules.” 

“ care,” say. “ care, okay?” 

“Maybe  should.” His voice is gentle;   wears his look of disapproval. “   were , 
wouldn’t want  get in trouble with your faction.” 

“What’s that supposed  mean?” 

know exactly what   means. He sees  faction as the cruelest of the five,  nothing more. 

“just  want   get hurt. You  have  be so angry with ,”   says, tilting his head. 
“What happened   in there?” 

“Nothing. Nothing happened  .” close  eyes  rub the back of  neck with one hand. 
Even if could explain everything  him, wouldn’t want .  ’t even summon the will  think 
about  . 

“You think...” He looks at his shoes. “You think  made the right choice?” 

“ think there was one,” say. “How about ?” 

He looks around. People stare at   as they walk past. His eyes skip over their faces. He’s still 
nervous, but maybe  ’s not because of how   looks, or because of . Maybe  ’s them. grab his 
arm  pull him under the arch of the metal bean. We walk beneath its hollow underbelly. see  
reflection everywhere, warped by the curve of the walls, broken by patches of rust  grime. 

“What’s going on?” say, folding  arms. didn’t notice the dark circles under his eyes before. 
“What’s wrong?” 

Caleb presses a palm  the metal wall. In his reflection, his head is small  pressed in on one 
side,  his arm looks like   is bending backward. My reflection, however, looks small  squat. 

“Something big is happening, Beatrice. Something is wrong.” His eyes are wide  glassy. “ 
know what   is, but people keep rushing around, talking quietly,  Jeanine gives speeches about 
how corrupt Abnegation is all the time, almost every day.” 

“Do  believe her?” 

“No. Maybe. ...” He shakes his head. “ know what  believe.” 

“Yes,  do,” say sternly. “You know who our parents are. You know who our friends are. 
Susan’s dad,  think  ’s corrupt?” 

“How much do know? How much did they allow   know? We weren’t allowed  ask 
questions, Beatrice; we weren’t allowed  know things! And here...” He looks up,  in the flat 
circle of mirror right above  , see our tiny figures, the size of fingernails. That, think, is our true 
reflection;   is as small as we actually are. He continues, “Here, information is free,  ’s always 
available.” 

“This isn’t Candor. There are liars here, Caleb. There are people who are so smart they know how  
manipulate .” 

“Don’t  think would know if was being manipulated?” 



“ they’re as smart as  think, then no.  think  would know.” 

“You have no idea what you’re talking about,”   says, shaking his head. 

“Yeah. How could possibly know what a corrupt faction looks like?   just training  be 
Dauntless, for God’s sake,” say. “At least know what   a part of, Caleb. You are choosing  
ignore what we’ve known all our lives—these people are arrogant  greedy  they will lead  
nowhere.” 

His voice hardens. “think  should go, Beatrice.” 

“With pleasure,” say. “Oh,  not that   will matter  , but Mom told   tell   
research the simulation serum.” 

“You saw her?” He looks hurt. “Why didn’t she—” 

“Because,” say. “The Erudite  let the Abnegation into their compound anymore. Wasn’t that 
information available  ?” 

push past him, walking away from the mirror cave  the sculpture,  start down the sidewalk. 
should never have left. The Dauntless compound sounds like home now—at least there, know 
exactly where stand, which is on unstable ground. 

The crowd on the sidewalk thins,  look up  see why. Standing a few yards in front of  are 
two Erudite men with their arms folded. 

“Excuse ,” one of them says. “You’ll have  come with  .” 

One man walks so close behind  that feel his breath against the back of  head. The other man 
leads  into the library  down three hallways  an elevator. Beyond the library the floors change 
from wood  white tile,  the walls glow like the ceiling of the aptitude test room. The glow 
bounces off the silver elevator doors,  squint so  see. 

try  stay calm. ask myself questions from Dauntless training. What do  do if someone 
attacks  from behind? envision thrusting  elbow back into a stomach or a groin. imagine 
running. wish had a gun. These are Dauntless thoughts,  they have become mine. 

What do  do if you’re attacked by two people at once? follow the man down an empty, glowing 
corridor  into an office. The walls are made of glass—guess know which faction designed  
school. 

A woman sits behind a metal desk. stare at her face. The same face dominates the Erudite library; 
  is plastered across every article Erudite releases. How long have hated that face?  
remember. 

“Sit,” Jeanine says. Her voice sounds familiar, especially when she is irritated. Her liquid gray eyes 
focus on mine. 

“I’d rather not.” 

“Sit,” she says again. have definitely heard her voice before. 

heard   in the hallway, talking  Eric, before got attacked. heard her mention Divergents. And 
once before—heard  ... 

“ was your voice in the simulation,” say. “The aptitude test, mean.” 

She is the danger Tori   mother warned  about, the danger of being Divergent. Sitting right 
in front of . 

“Correct. The aptitude test is by far  greatest achievement as a scientist,” she replies. “looked 
up your test results, Beatrice. Apparently there was a problem with your test.  was never recorded, 
 your results had  be reported manually. Did  know that?” 



“No.” 

“Did  know that you’re one of two people ever  get an Abnegation result  switch  
Dauntless?” 

“No,” say, biting back  shock. Tobias  are the only ones? But his result was genuine  
mine was a lie. So   is really just him. 

My stomach twinges at the thought of him. Right now  care how unique   is. He called  
pathetic. 

“What made  choose Dauntless?” she asks. 

“What does this have  do with anything?” try  soften  voice, but   doesn’t work. “Aren’t 
 going  reprimand  for abandoning  faction  seeking out  brother? Taction before 
blood,’ right?” pause. “Come  think of  , why am in your office in the first place? Aren’t  
supposed  be important or something?” 

Maybe that will take her down a few pegs. 

Her mouth pinches for a second. “will leave the reprimands  the Dauntless,” she says, leaning 
back in her chair. 

set  hands on the back of the chair refused  sit in  clench  fingers. Behind her is a 
window that overlooks the city. The train takes a lazy turn in the distance. 

“As  the reason for your presence here...a quality of  faction is curiosity,” she says, “and while 
perusing your records, saw that there was another error with another one of your simulations. Again, 
  failed  be recorded. Did  know that?” 

“How did  access  records? Only the Dauntless have access  those.” 

“Because Erudite developed the simulations, we have an ...understanding with the Dauntless, 
Beatrice.” She tilts her head  smiles at . “am merely concerned for the competence of our 
technology.    fails while  are around, have  ensure that   does not continue  do so,  
understand?” 

understand only one thing: She is lying  . She doesn’t care about the technology—she 
suspects that something is awry with  test results. Just like the Dauntless leaders, she is sniffing 
around for the Divergent. And if  mother wants Caleb  research the simulation serum,   is 
probably because Jeanine developed  . 

But what is so threatening about  ability  manipulate the simulations? Why would   matter  
the representative of the Erudite, of all people? 

 ’t answer either question. But the look she gives  reminds  of the look in the attack dog’s 
eyes in the aptitude test—a vicious, predatory stare. She wants  rip   pieces.  ’t lie down in 
submission now. have become an attack dog too. 

feel  pulse in  throat. 

“ know how they work,” say, “but the liquid was injected with made  sick   
stomach. Maybe  simulation administrator was distracted because   was worried would throw 
up,    forgot  record  . got sick after the aptitude test too.” 

“Do  habitually have a sensitive stomach, Beatrice?” Her voice is like a razor’s edge. She taps 
her trimmed fingernails against the glass desk. 

“Ever since was young,” reply as smoothly as . release the chair back  sidestep    sit 
down.  ’t seem tense, even though feel like  insides are writhing within . 

“You have been extremely successful with the simulations,” she says. “To what do  attribute the 



ease with which  complete them?” 

“  brave,” say, staring into her eyes. The other factions see the Dauntless a certain  . Brash, 
aggressive, impulsive. Cocky. should be what she expects. smirk at her. “  the best initiate 
they’ve got.” 

lean forward, balancing  elbows on  knees. will have  go further with this  make   
convincing. 

“You want  know why chose Dauntless?” ask. “’s because was bored.” Further, further. Lies 
require commitment. “was tired of being a wussy little do-gooder  wanted out.” 

“So   miss your parents?” she asks delicately. 

“Do miss getting scolded for looking in the mirror? Do miss being told  shut up at the dinner 
table?” shake  head. “No.  miss them. They’re not  family anymore.” 

The lie burns  throat on the   out, or maybe that’s the tears   fighting. picture  mother 
standing behind  with a comb  a pair of scissors, faintly smiling as she trims  hair,  want 
 scream rather than insult her like this. 

“Can take that  mean...” Jeanine purses her lips  pauses for a few seconds before finishing. 
“.. .that  agree with the reports that have been released about the political leaders of this city?” 

The reports that label  family as corrupt, power-hungry, moralizing dictators? The reports that 
carry subtle threats  hint at revolution? They make  sick   stomach. Knowing that she is the 
one who released them makes  want  strangle her. 

smile. 

“Wholeheartedly,” say. 

One of Jeanine’s lackeys, a man in a blue collared shirt  sunglasses, drives  back  the 
Dauntless compound in a sleek silver car, the likes of which have never seen before. The engine is 
almost silent. When ask the man about  ,   tells   ’s solar-powered  launches into a lengthy 
explanation of how the panels on the roof convert sunlight into energy. stop listening after sixty 
seconds  stare out the window. 

 know what they’ll do   when get back. suspect   will be bad. imagine  feet 
dangling over the chasm  bite  lip. 

When the driver pulls up  the glass building above the Dauntless compound, Eric is waiting for 
 by the door. He takes  arm  leads  into the building without thanking the driver. Eric’s 
fingers squeeze so hard know I’ll have bruises. 

He stands between   the door that leads inside. He starts  crack his knuckles. Other than 
that,   is completely still. 

shudder involuntarily. 

The faint pop of his knuckle-cracking is all hear apart from  own breaths, which grow faster by 
the second. When   is finished, Eric laces his fingers together in front of him. 

“Welcome back, Tris.” 

“Eric.” 

He walks toward , carefully placing one foot in front of the other. 

“What...” His first word is quiet. “Exactly,”   adds, louder this time, “were  thinking?” 

“I...” He is so close  see the holes his metal piercings fit into. “ know.” 

“am tempted  call  a traitor, Tris,”   says. “Have  never heard the phrase Taction before 
blood’?” 



have seen Eric do terrible things. have heard him say terrible things. But have never seen him 
like this. He is not a maniac anymore;   is perfectly controlled, perfectly poised. Careful  quiet. 

For the first time, recognize Eric for what   is: an Erudite disguised as a Dauntless, a genius as 
well as a sadist, a hunter of the Divergent. 

want  run. 

“Were  unsatisfied with the life  have found here? Do  perhaps regret your choice?” Both 
of Eric’s metal-ridden eyebrows lift, forcing creases into his forehead. “would like  hear an 
explanation for why  betrayed Dauntless, yourself,  ...” He taps his chest, “...by venturing 
into another faction’s headquarters.” 

“I...” take a deep breath. He would kill  if   knew what was,  feel  . His hands curl into 
fists. am alone here; if something happens  , no one will know  no one will see  . 

“  cannot explain,”   says softly, “may be forced  reconsider your rank. Or, because  
seem  be so attached  your previous faction...perhaps will be forced  reconsider your friends’ 
ranks. Perhaps the little Abnegation girl inside of  would take that more seriously.” 

My first thought is that   couldn’t do that,   wouldn’t be fair. My second thought is that of course 
  would,   would not hesitate  do   for a second. And   is right—the thought that  reckless 
behavior could force someone else out of a faction makes  chest ache from fear. 

try again. “I...” 

But   is hard  breathe. 

And then the door opens. Tobias walks in. 

“What are  doing?”   asks Eric. 

“Leave the room,” Eric says, his voice louder  not as monotone. He sounds more like the Eric 
am familiar with. His expression, too, changes, becomes more mobile  animated. stare, amazed 
that    turn   on  off so easily,  wonder what the strategy behind   is. 

“No,” Tobias says. “She’s just a foolish girl. There’s no need  drag her here  interrogate her.” 

“Just a foolish girl.” Eric snorts. “ she were just a foolish girl, she wouldn’t be ranked first, now 
would she?” 

Tobias pinches the bridge of his nose  looks at  through the spaces between his fingers. He is 
trying  tell  something. think quickly. What advice has Four given  recently? 

The only thing  think of is: pretend some vulnerability. 

’s worked for  before. 

“I...was just embarrassed  didn’t know what  do.” put  hands in  pockets  look at 
the ground. Then pinch  leg so hard that tears well up in  eyes,  look up at Eric, sniffing. 
“tried ... ...” shake  head. 

“You tried  what?” asks Eric. 

“Kiss ,” says Tobias. “And rejected her,  she went running off like a five-year-old. There’s 
really nothing  blame her for but stupidity.” 

We both wait. 

Eric looks from   Tobias  laughs, too loudly  for too long—the sound is menacing  
grates against  like sandpaper. “Isn’t   a little too old for , Tris?”   says, smiling again. 

wipe  cheek like   wiping a tear. “Can go now?” 

“Fine,” Eric says, “but  are not allowed  leave the compound without supervision again,  
hear ?” He turns toward Tobias. “And ... had better make sure none of the transfers leave this 



compound again. And that none of the others try  kiss .” 

Tobias rolls his eyes. “Fine.” 

leave the room  walk outside again, shaking  hands  get rid of the jitters. sit down on the 
pavement  wrap  arms around  knees. 

 know how long sit there,  head down   eyes closed, before the door opens again.  
might have been twenty minutes    might have been an hour. Tobias walks toward . 

stand  cross  arms, waiting for the scolding  start. slapped him  then got myself into 
trouble with the Dauntless—there has  be scolding. 

“What?” say. 

“Are  all right?” A crease appears between his eyebrows,    touches  cheek gently. bat 
his hand away. 

“Well,” say, “first got reamed out in front of everyone,  then had  chat with the woman 
who’s trying  destroy  old faction,  then Eric almost tossed  friends out of Dauntless, so 
yeah,  ’s shaping up  be a pretty great day, Four.” 

He shakes his head  looks at the dilapidated building  his right, which is made of brick  
barely resembles the sleek glass spire behind .  must be ancient. No one builds with brick 
anymore. 

“Why do  care, anyway?” say. “You  be either cruel instructor or concerned boyfriend.” 
tense up at the word “boyfriend.” didn’t mean  use   so flippantly, but  ’s too late now. “You  ’t 
play both parts at the same time.” 

“am not cruel.” He scowls at . “was protecting  this morning. How do  think Peter  
his idiot friends would have reacted if they discovered that   were...” He sighs. “You would 
never win. They would always call your ranking a result of  favoritism rather than your skill.” 

open  mouth  object, but  ’t. A few smart remarks come  mind, but dismiss them. He’s 
right. My cheeks warm,  cool them with  hands. 

“You didn’t have  insult   prove something  them,” say finally. 

“And  didn’t have  run off  your brother just because hurt ,”   says. He rubs at the 
back of his neck. “Besides—  worked, didn’t  ?” 

“At  expense.” 

“didn’t think   would affect  this  .” Then   looks down  shrugs. “Sometimes forget 
that  hurt . That  are capable of being hurt.” 

slide  hands into  pockets  rock back on  heels. A strange feeling goes through me—a 
sweet, aching weakness. He did what   did because   believed in  strength. 

At home   was Caleb who was strong, because   could forget himself, because all the 
characteristics  parents valued came naturally  him. No one has ever been so convinced of  
strength. 

stand on  tiptoes, lift  head,  kiss him. Only our lips touch. 

“You’re brilliant,  know that?” shake  head. “You always know exactly what  do.” 

“Only because I’ve been thinking about this for a long time,”   says, kissing  briefly. “How 
would handle  , if   ...” He pulls back  smiles. “Did hear  call  your boyfriend, 
Tris?” 

“Not exactly.” shrug. “Why? Do  want  ?” 

He slips his hands over  neck  presses his thumbs under  chin, tilting  head back so his 



forehead meets mine. For a moment   stands there, his eyes closed, breathing  air. feel the pulse 
in his fingertips. feel the quickness of his breath. He seems nervous. 

“Yes,”   finally says. Then his smile fades. “You think we convinced him you’re just a silly girl?” 

“hope so,” say. “Sometimes   helps  be small.   not sure convinced the Erudite, though.” 

The corners of his mouth tug down,    gives  a grave look. “There’s something need  tell 
.” 

“What is  ?” 

“Not now.” He glances around. “Meet  back here at eleven thirty. Don’t tell anyone where you’re 
going.” 

nod,    turns away, leaving just as quickly as   came. 

“Where have  been all day?” Christina asks when walk back into the dormitory. The room is 
empty; everyone else must be at dinner. “looked for  outside, but couldn’t find . Is 
everything okay? Did  get in trouble for hitting Four?” 

shake  head. The thought of telling her the truth about where was makes  feel exhausted. 
How  explain the impulse  hop on a train  visit  brother? Or the eerie calm in Eric’s voice 
as   questioned ? Or the reason that exploded  hit Tobias  begin with? 

“just had  get away. walked around for a long time,” say. “And no,   not in trouble. He 
yelled at , apologized...that’s  .” 

As speak,   careful  keep  eyes steady on hers   hands still at  sides. 

“Good,” she says. “Because have something  tell .” 

She looks over  head at the door  then stands on her tiptoes  see all the bunks—checking if 
they’re empty, probably. Then she sets her hands on  shoulders. 

“Can  be a girl for a few seconds?” 

“  always a girl.” frown. 

“You know what mean. Like a silly, annoying girl.” 

twirl  hair around  finger. “’Kay.” 

She grins so wide  see her back row of teeth. “Will kissed .” 

“What?” demand. “When? How? What happened?” 

“You  be a girl!” She straightens, taking her hands from  shoulders. “Well, right after your 
little episode, we ate lunch  then we walked around near the train tracks. We were just talking 
about... even remember what we were talking about. And then   just stopped,  leaned in, 
...kissed .” 

“Did  know that   liked ?” say. “mean,  know. Like that.” 

“No!” She laughs. “The best part was, that was  . We just kept walking  talking like nothing 
happened. Well, until / kissed him.” 

“How long have  known  liked him?” 

“ know. guess didn’t. But then little things...how   put his arm around  at the funeral, 
how   opens doors for  like   a girl instead of someone who could beat the crap out of him.” 

laugh. Suddenly want  tell her about Tobias  everything that has happened between  . But 
the same reasons Tobias gave for pretending we aren’t together hold  back.  want her  
think that  rank has anything  do with  relationship with him. 

So just say, “  happy for .” 



“Thanks,” she says. “  happy too. And thought   would be a while before could feel that 
 ... know.” 

She sits down on the edge of  bed  looks around the dormitory. Some of the initiates have 
already packed their things. Soon we’ll move into apartments on the other side of the compound. 
Those with government jobs will move  the glass building above the Pit. won’t have  worry about 
Peter attacking  in  sleep. won’t have  look at Al’s empty bed. 

“ ’t believe  ’s almost over,” she says. “’s like we just got here. But  ’s also like...like 
haven’t seen home in forever.” 

“You miss  ?” lean into the bed frame. 

“Yeah.” She shrugs. “Some things are the same, though. mean, everyone at home is just as loud as 
everyone here, so that’s good. But  ’s easier there. You always know where  stand with everyone, 
because they tell . There’s no...manipulation.” 

nod. Abnegation prepared  for that aspect of Dauntless life. The Abnegation aren’t 
manipulative, but they aren’t forthright, either. 

“ think could have made   through Candor initiation, though.” She shakes her head. “There, 
instead of simulations,  get lie detector tests. All day, every day. And the final test...” She 
wrinkles her nose. “They give  this stuff they call truth serum  sit  in front of everyone  
ask  a load of really personal questions. The theory is that if  spill all your secrets, you’ll have 
no desire  lie about anything, ever again. Like the worst about  is already in the open, so why not 
just be honest?” 

 know when accumulated so many secrets. Being Divergent. Fears. How really feel about 
 friends,  family, Al, Tobias. Candor initiation would reach things that even the simulations 
 ’t touch;   would wreck . 

“Sounds awful,” say. 

“always knew couldn’t be Candor. mean, try  be honest, but some things  just  want 
people  know. Plus, like  be in control of  own mind.” 

Don’t we all. 

“Anyway,” she says. She opens the cabinet  the left of our bunk beds. When she pulls the door 
open, a moth flutters out, its white wings carrying   toward her face. Christina shrieks so loud 
almost jump out of  skin  slaps at her cheeks. 

“Get   off! Get   off get   off get   off!” she screams. 

The moth flutters away. 

“’s gone!” say. Then laugh. “You’re afraid of...moths?” 

“They’re disgusting. Those papery wings  their stupid bug bodies...” She shudders. 

keep laughing. laugh so hard have  sit down  hold  stomach. 

“’s not funny!” she snaps. “Well...okay, maybe   is. A little.” 

When find Tobias late that night,   doesn’t say anything;   just grabs  hand  pulls  
toward the train tracks. 

He draws himself into a train car as   passes with bewildering ease  pulls  in after him. fall 
against him,  cheek against his chest. His fingers slide down  arms,    holds  by the 
elbows as the car bumps along the steel rails. watch the glass building above the Dauntless 
compound shrink behind  . 

“What is    need  tell ?” shout over the cry of the wind. 



“Not yet,”   says. 

He sinks  the floor  pulls  down with him, so  ’s sitting with his back against the wall  
  facing him,  legs trailing  the side on the dusty floor. The wind pushes strands of  hair 
loose  tosses them over  face. He presses his palms   face, his index fingers sliding behind 
 ears,  pulls  mouth  his. 

hear the screech of the rails as the train slows, which means we must be nearing the middle of the 
city. The air is cold, but his lips are warm  so are his hands. He tilts his head  kisses the skin 
just beneath  jaw.   glad the air is so loud    ’t hear  sigh. 

The train car wobbles, throwing off  balance,  put  hand down  steady myself. A split 
second later realize that  hand is on his hip. The bone presses into  palm. should move  , but 
 want . He told  once  be brave,  though have stood still while knives spun toward 
 face  jumped off a roof, never thought would need bravery in the small moments of  life. 
do. 

shift, swinging a leg over him so sit on top of him,  with  heartbeat in  throat, kiss 
him. He sits up straighter  feel his hands on  shoulders. His fingers slip down  spine  a 
shiver follows them down  the small of  back. He unzips  jacket a few inches,  press  
hands   legs  stop them from shaking. should not be nervous. This is Tobias. 

Cold air slips across  bare skin. He pulls away  looks carefully at the tattoos just above  
collarbone. His fingers brush over them,    smiles. 

“Birds,”   says. “Are they crows? keep forgetting  ask.” 

try  return his smile. “Ravens. One for each member of  family,” say. “You like them?” 

He doesn’t answer. He tugs  closer, pressing his lips  each bird in turn. close  eyes. His 
touch is light, sensitive. A heavy, warm feeling, like spilling honey, fills  body, slowing  
thoughts. He touches  cheek. 

“hate  say this,”   says, “but we have  get up now.” 

nod  open  eyes. We both stand,    tugs  with him  the open door of the train car. 
The wind is not as strong now that the train has slowed. ’s past midnight, so all the street lights are 
dark,  the buildings look like mammoths as they rise from the darkness  then sink into   again. 
Tobias lifts a hand  points at a cluster of buildings, so far away they are the size of a fingernail. 
They are the only bright spot in the dark sea around  . Erudite headquarters again. 

“Apparently the city ordinances  mean anything  them,”   says, “because their lights will be 
on all night.” 

“No one else has noticed?” say, frowning. 

“  sure they have, but they haven’t done anything  stop  .  may be because they  want  
cause a problem over something so small.” Tobias shrugs, but the tension in his features worries . 
“But   made  wonder what the Erudite are doing that requires night light.” 

He turns toward , leaning against the wall. 

“Two things  should know about . The first is that am deeply suspicious of people in 
general,”   says. “ is  nature  expect the worst of them. And the second is that am 
unexpectedly good with computers.” 

nod. He said his other job was working with computers, but still have trouble picturing him 
sitting in front of a screen all day. 

“A few weeks ago, before training started, was at work  found a   into the Dauntless secure 



files. Apparently we are not as skilled as the Erudite are at security,”   says, “and what discovered 
was what looked like war plans. Thinly veiled commands, supply lists, maps. Things like that. And 
those files were sent by Erudite.” 

“War?” brush  hair away from  face. Listening   father insult Erudite all  life has 
made  wary of them,   experiences in the Dauntless compound make  wary of authority 
 human beings in general, so   not shocked  hear that a faction could be planning a war. 

And what Caleb said earlier. Something big is happening, Beatrice. look up at Tobias. 

“War on Abnegation?” 

He takes  hands, lacing his fingers with mine,  says, “The faction that controls the 
government. Yes.” 

My stomach sinks. 

“All those reports are supposed  stir up dissension against Abnegation,”   says, his eyes focused 
on the city beyond the train car. “Evidently the Erudite now want  speed up the process. have no 
idea what  do about  .. .or what could even be done.” 

“But,” say, “why would Erudite team up with Dauntless?” 

And then something occurs  , something that hits  in the gut  gnaws at  insides. 
Erudite doesn’t have weapons,  they  know how  fight—but the Dauntless do. 

stare wide-eyed at Tobias. 

“They’re going  use  ,” say. 

“wonder,”   says, “how they plan  get    fight.” 

told Caleb that the Erudite know how  manipulate people. They could coerce some of   into 
fighting with misinformation, or by appealing  greed—any number of ways. But the Erudite are as 
meticulous as they are manipulative, so they wouldn’t leave   up  chance. They would need  make 
sure that all their weaknesses are shored up. But how? 

The wind blows  hair across  face, cutting  vision into strips,  leave   there. 

“ know,” say. 

have attended Abnegation’s initiation ceremony every year except this one.  is a quiet affair. The 
initiates, who spend thirty days performing community service before they  become full members, 
sit side by side on a bench. One of the older members reads the Abnegation manifesto, which is a short 
paragraph about forgetting the self  the dangers of self-involvement. Then all the older members 
wash the initiates’ feet. Then they all share a meal, each person serving food  the person on his left. 

The Dauntless  do that. 

Initiation day plunges the Dauntless compound into insanity  chaos. There are people 
everywhere,  most of them are inebriated by noon. fight    through them  get a plate of 
food at lunch  carry   back  the dormitory with . On the   see someone fall off the path on 
the Pit wall , judging by his screams  the     grabs at his leg,   broke something. 

The dormitory, at least, is quiet. stare at  plate of food. just grabbed what looked good   
at the time,  now that take a closer look, realize that chose a plain chicken breast, a scoop of 
peas,  a piece of brown bread. Abnegation food. 

sigh. Abnegation is what am.  is what am when   not thinking about what   doing.  is 
what am when am put  the test.  is what am even when appear  be brave. Am in the wrong 
faction? 

The thought of  former faction sends a tremor through  hands. have  warn  family about 
the war the Erudite are planning, but  know how. will find a  , but not today. Today have 
 focus on what awaits . One thing at a time. 

eat like a robot, rotating from chicken  peas  bread  back again.  doesn’t matter what 
faction really belong in. In two hours will walk  the fear landscape room with the other initiates, 
go through  fear landscape,  become Dauntless. ’s too late  turn back. 

When finish, bury  face in  pillow.  mean  fall asleep, but after a while, do,  
wake up  Christina shaking  shoulder. 

“Time  go,” she says. She looks ashen. 

rub  eyes  press the sleep from them. have  shoes on already. The other initiates are in 
the dormitory, tying shoelaces  buttoning jackets  throwing smiles around like they  mean 
 . pull  hair into a bun  put on  black jacket, zipping   up   throat. The torture will be 
over soon, but  we forget the simulations? Will we ever sleep soundly again, with the memories of 
our fears in our heads? Or will we finally forget our fears today, like we’re supposed ? 

We walk  the Pit  up the path that leads  the glass building. look up at the glass ceiling. 
 ’t see daylight because the soles of shoes cover every inch of glass above  . For a second think 
hear the glass creak, but   is  imagination. walk up the stairs with Christina,  the crowd 
chokes . 

am too short  see above anyone’s head, so stare at Will’s back  walk in his wake. The heat 
of so many bodies around  makes   difficult  breathe. Beads of sweat gather on  forehead. A 
break in the crowd reveals what they are all clustered around: a series of screens on the wall   
left. 

hear a cheer  stop  look at the screens. The screen on the left shows a black-clothed girl in the 
fear landscape room—Marlene. watch her move, her eyes wide, but  ’t tell what obstacle she’s 
facing. Thank God no one out here will see  fears either—just  reactions  them. 


The middle screen shows her heart rate.  picks up for a second  then decreases. When   reaches 
a normal rate, the screen flashes green  the Dauntless cheer. The screen on the right shows her 
time. 

tear  eyes from the screen  jog  catch up  Christina  Will. Tobias stands just inside a 
door on the left side of the room that barely noticed the last time was here.  is next  the fear 
landscape room. walk past him without looking at him. 

The room is large  contains another screen, similar  the one outside. A line of people sit in 
chairs in front of  . Eric is one of them,  so is Max. The others are also older. Judging by the wires 
connected  their heads,  their blank eyes, they are observing the simulation. 

Behind them is another line of chairs, all occupied now. am the last  enter, so  get one. 

“Hey, Tris!” Uriah calls out from across the room. He sits with the other Dauntless-born initiates. 
Only four of them are left; the rest have gone through their fear landscapes already. He pats his leg. 
“You  sit on  lap, if  want.” 

“Tempting,” call back, grinning. “’s fine. like  stand.” 

also  want Tobias  see  sitting on someone else’s lap. 

The lights lift in the fear landscape room, revealing Marlene in a crouch, her face streaked with 
tears. Max, Eric,  a few others shake off the simulation daze  walk out. A few seconds later 
see them on the screen, congratulating her for finishing. 

“Transfers, the order in which  go through the final test was taken from your rankings as they 
now stand,” Tobias says. “So Drew will go first,  Tris will go last.” 

That means five people will go before do. 

stand in the back of the room, a few feet away from Tobias. He  exchange glances when Eric 
sticks Drew with the needle  sends him into the fear landscape room. By the time  ’s  turn, 
will know how well the others did,  how well will have  do  beat them. 

The fear landscapes are not interesting  watch from the outside.  see that Drew is moving, but 
 know what   is reacting . After a few minutes, close  eyes instead of watching  try 
 think of nothing. Speculating about which fears will have  face,  how many there will be, is 
useless at this point. just have  remember that have the power  manipulate the simulations,  
that have practiced   before. 

Molly goes next.  takes her half as long as   takes Drew, but even Molly has trouble. She spends 
too much time breathing heavily, trying  control her panic. At one point she even screams at the top 
of her lungs. 

 amazes  how easy   is  tune out everything else—thoughts of war on Abnegation, Tobias, 
Caleb,  parents,  friends,  new faction fade away. All  do now is get past this obstacle. 

Christina is next. Then Will. Then Peter.  watch them. know only how much time   takes 
them: twelve minutes, ten minutes, fifteen minutes. And then  name. 

“Tris.” 

open  eyes  walk  the front of the observation room, where Eric stands with a syringe full 
of orange liquid. barely feel the needle as   plunges into  neck, barely see Eric’s pierced face as 
  presses the plunger down. imagine that the serum is liquid adrenaline rushing through  veins, 
making  strong. 

“Ready?”   asks. 

am ready. step into the room, armed not with a gun or a knife, but with the plan made the night 
before. Tobias said that stage three is about mental preparation—coming up with strategies  
overcome  fears. 

wish knew what order the fears will come in. bounce on the balls of  feet as wait for the 
first fear  appear. am already short of breath. 

The ground beneath  changes. Grass rises from the concrete  sways in a wind cannot feel. A 
green sky replaces the exposed pipes above . listen for the birds  feel  fear as a distant 
thing, a hammering heart  a squeezed chest, but not something that exists in  mind. Tobias told 
  figure out what this simulation means. He was right;   isn’t about the birds. ’s about control. 

Wings flap next   ear,  the crow’s talons dig into  shoulder. 

This time, do not hit the bird as hard as . crouch, listening  the thunder of wings behind 
,  run  hand through the grass, just above the ground. What combats powerlessness? Power. 
And the first time felt powerful in the Dauntless compound was when was holding a gun. 

A lump forms in  throat  want the talons off. The bird squawks   stomach clenches, 
but then feel something hard  metal in the grass. My gun. 

point the gun at the bird on  shoulder,    detaches from  shirt in an explosion of blood 
 feathers. spin on  heel, aiming the gun at the sky,  see the cloud of dark feathers 
descending. squeeze the trigger, firing again  again into the sea of birds above , watching their 
dark bodies drop  the grass. 

As aim  shoot, feel the same rush of power felt the first time held a gun. My heart stops 
racing  the field, gun,  birds fade away. stand in the dark again. 

shift  weight,  something squeaks beneath  foot. crouch down  slide  hand along 
a cold, smooth panel—glass. press  hands  glass on either side of  body. The tank again. am 
not afraid of drowning. This is not about the water;   is about  inability  escape the tank.  is 
about weakness. just have  convince myself that am strong enough  break the glass. 

The blue lights come on,  water slips over the floor, but  let the simulation get that far. 
slam  palm against the wall in front of , expecting the pane  break. 

My hand bounces off, causing no damage. 

My heartbeat speeds up. What if what worked in the first simulation doesn’t work here? What if 
 ’t break the glass unless   under duress? The water laps over  ankles, flowing faster by the 
second. have  calm down. Calm down  focus. lean against the wall behind   kick as hard 
as . And again. My toes throb, but nothing happens. 

have another option.  wait for water  fill the tank—and  ’s already at  knees—and try  
calm down as drown. brace myself against the wall, shaking  head. No.  ’t let myself drown. 
 ’t. 

ball  hands up into fists  pound on the wall. am stronger than the glass. The glass is as thin 
as newly frozen ice. My mind will make   so. close  eyes. The glass is ice. The glass is ice. The 
glass is— 

The glass shatters under  hand,  water spills onto the floor. And then the dark returns. 

shake out  hands. That should have been an easy obstacle  overcome. I’ve faced   before in 


simulations.  ’t afford  lose time like that again. 

What feels like a solid wall hits  from the side, forcing the air from  lungs,  fall hard, 
gasping.  ’t swim; I’ve only seen bodies of water this large, this powerful, in pictures. Beneath  
is a rock with a jagged edge, slick with water. The water pulls at  legs,  cling  the rock, 
tasting salt on  lips. Out of the corner of  eye, see a dark sky  a blood-red moon. 

Another wave hits, slamming against  back. hit  chin against the stone  wince. The sea is 
cold, but  blood is hot, running down  neck. stretch  arm  find the edge of the rock. The 
water pulls at  legs with irresistible force. cling as hard as , but am not strong enough—the 
water pulls   the wave throws  body back.  flings  legs over  head   arms  
each side,  collide with the stone,  back pressed against  , water gushing over  face. My 
lungs scream for air. twist  grab the edge of the rock, pulling myself above the water. gasp,  
another wave hits , this one harder than the first, but have a better hold. 

must not really be afraid of the water. must be afraid of being out of control. To face  , have  
regain control. 

With a scream of frustration, throw  hand forward  find a hole in the rock. My arms shake 
violently as drag myself forward,  pull  feet up under  before the wave  take  with 
 . Once  feet are free, get up  throw  body into a run, into a sprint,  feet quick on the 
stone, the red moon in front of , the ocean gone. 

Then everything is gone,   body is still. Too still. 

try  move  arms, but they are bound tightly   sides. look down  see rope wrapped 
around  chest,  arms,  legs. A stack of logs rises around  feet,  see a pole behind . 
am high above the ground. 

People creep out of the shadows,  their faces are familiar. They are the initiates, carrying 
torches,  Peter is at the front of the pack. His eyes look like black pits,    wears a smirk that 
spreads too wide across his face, forcing wrinkles into his cheeks. A laugh starts somewhere in the 
center of the crowd  rises as voice after voice joins  . Cackling is all hear. 

As the cackling grows louder, Peter lowers his torch  the wood,  flames leap up near the 
ground. They flicker at the edges of each log  then creep over the bark.  struggle against the 
ropes, as did the first time faced this fear. Instead close  eyes  gulp as much air as . 
This is a simulation.   ’t hurt . The heat from the flames rises around . shake  head. 

“Smell that, Stiff?” Peter says, his voice louder than even the cackling. 

“No,” say. The flames are getting higher. 

He sniffs. “That’s the smell of your burning flesh.” 

When open  eyes,  vision is blurry with tears. 

“Know what smell?” My voice strains  be louder than the laughter all around , the laughter 
that oppresses  as much as the heat. My arms twitch,  want  fight against the ropes, but 
won’t, won’t struggle pointlessly, won’t panic. 

stare through the flames at Peter, the heat bringing blood  the surface of  skin, flowing 
through , melting the toes of  shoes. 

“smell rain,” say. 

Thunder roars above  head,  scream as a flame touches  fingertips  pain shrieks over 
 skin. tilt  head back  focus on the clouds gathering above  head, heavy with rain, dark 
with rain. A line of lightning sprawls over the sky  feel the first drop on  forehead. Faster, 
faster! The drop rolls down the side of  nose,  the second drop hits  shoulder, so big   feels 



like  ’s made of ice or rock instead of water. 

Sheets of rain fall around ,  hear sizzling over the laughter. smile, relieved, as the rain puts 
out the fire  soothes the burns on  hands. The ropes fall away,  push  hands through  
hair. 

wish was like Tobias  had only four fears  face, but am not that fearless. 

smooth  shirt down,  when look up, stand in  bedroom in the Abnegation sector of the 
city. have never faced this fear before. The lights are off, but the room is lit by the moonlight coming 
through the windows. One of  walls is covered with mirrors. turn toward  , confused. That isn’t 
right. am not allowed  have mirrors. 

look at the reflection in the mirror:  wide eyes, the bed with the gray sheets pulled taut, the 
dresser that holds  clothes, the bookcase, the bare walls. My eyes skip  the window behind . 

And  the man standing just outside. 

Cold drops down  spine like a bead of sweat,   body goes rigid. recognize him. He is the 
man with the scarred face from the aptitude test. He wears black    stands still as a statue. blink, 
 two men appear at his left  right, just as still as   is, but their faces are featureless—skin- 
covered skulls. 

whip  body around,  they stand in  room. press  shoulders  the mirror. 

For a moment, the room is silent,  then fists pound against  window, not just two or four or 
six, but dozens of fists with dozens of fingers, slamming into the glass. The noise vibrates in  rib 
cage,   is so loud,  then the scarred man  his two companions begin  walk with slow, careful 
movements toward . 

They are here  take , like Peter  Drew  Al;  kill . know  . 

Simulation. This is a simulation. My heart hammering in  chest, press  palm  the glass 
behind   slide    the left.  is not a mirror but a closet door. tell myself where the weapon 
will be.  will be hanging against the right wall, just inches away from  hand.  shift  eyes 
from the scarred man, but find the gun with  fingertips  wrap  hand around the handle. 

bite  lip  fire at the scarred man.  wait  see if the bullet hits him—aim at each 
featureless man in turn, as fast as . My lip aches from biting   so hard. The pounding on the 
window stops, but a screeching sound replaces  ,  the fists turn into hands with bent fingers, 
scratching at the glass, fighting  get in. The glass creaks under the pressure of their hands,  then 
cracks,  then shatters. 

scream. 

 have enough bullets in  gun. 

Pale bodies—human bodies, but mangled, arms bent at odd angles, too-wide mouths with needle 
teeth, empty eye sockets—topple into  bedroom, one after the other,  scramble  their feet, 
scramble toward . pull back into the closet  shut the door in front of . A solution. need a 
solution. sink into a crouch  press the side of the gun   head.  ’t fight them off.  ’t 
fight them off, so have  calm down. The fear landscape will register  slowing heartbeat   
even breath    will move on  the next obstacle. 

sit down on the floor of the closet. The wall behind  creaks. hear pounding—the fists are at   
again, hitting the closet door—but turn  peer through the dark at the panel behind .  is not a 
wall but another door. fumble  push   aside  reveal the upstairs hallway. Smiling, crawl 
through the hole  stand. smell something baking. am at home. 

Taking a deep breath, watch  house fade. forgot, for a second, that was in Dauntless 



headquarters. 

And then Tobias is standing in front of . 

But   not afraid of Tobias. look over  shoulder. Maybe there’s something behind  that   
supposed  focus on. But no—behind  is just a four-poster bed. 

Abed? 

Tobias walks toward , slowly. 

What’s going on? 

stare up at him, paralyzed. He smiles down at . That smile looks kind. Familiar. 

He presses his mouth  mine,   lips part. thought   would be impossible  forget was in a 
simulation. was wrong;   makes everything else disintegrate. 

His fingers find  jacket zipper  pull   down in one slow swipe until the zipper detaches. He 
tugs the jacket from  shoulders. 

Oh, is all  think, as   kisses  again. Oh. 

My fear is being with him. have been wary of affection all  life, but didn’t know how deep 
that wariness went. 

But this obstacle doesn’t feel the same as the others.  is a different kind of fear—nervous panic 
rather than blind terror. 

He slides his hands down  arms  then squeezes  hips, his fingers sliding over the skin just 
above  belt,  shiver. 

gently push him back  press  hands   forehead. have been attacked by crows  men 
with grotesque faces; have been set on fire by the boy who almost threw  off a ledge; have 
almost drowned— twice —and this is what  ’t cope with? This is the fear have no solutions for—a 
boy like, who wants .. .have sex with ? 

Simulation Tobias kisses  neck. 

try  think. have  face the fear. have  take control of the situation  find a    make   
less frightening. 

look Simulation Tobias in the eye  say sternly, “am not going  sleep with  in a 
hallucination. Okay?” 

Then grab him by his shoulders  turn   around, pushing him against the bedpost. feel 
something other than fear—a prickle in  stomach, a bubble of laughter. press against him  kiss 
him,  hands wrapping around his arms. He feels strong. He feels...good. 

And  ’s gone. 

laugh into  hand until  face gets hot. must be the only initiate with this fear. 

A trigger clicks in  ear. 

almost forgot about this one. feel the heft of a gun in  hand  curl  fingers around  , 
slipping  index finger over the trigger. A spotlight shines from the ceiling, its source unknown,  
standing in the center of its circle of light are  mother,  father,   brother. 

“Do  ,” hisses a voice next  .  is female, but harsh, like  ’s cluttered with rocks  broken 
glass.  sounds like Jeanine. 

The barrel of a gun presses   temple, a cold circle against  skin. The cold travels across  
body, making the hair on the back of  neck stand on end. wipe  sweaty palm on  pants  
look at the woman through the corner of  eye.  is Jeanine. Her glasses are askew,  her eyes are 
empty of feeling. 



My worst fear: that  family will die,  that will be responsible. 

“Do  ,” she says again, more insistent this time. “Do   or I’ll kill .” 

stare at Caleb. He nods, his eyebrows tugged in, sympathetic. “Go ahead, Tris,”   says softly. “
understand. ’s okay.” 

My eyes burn. “No,” say,  throat so tight   aches. shake  head. 

“I’ll give  ten seconds!” the woman shouts. “Ten! Nine!” 

My eyes skip from  brother   father. The last time saw him,   gave  a look of 
contempt, but now his eyes are wide  soft. have never seen him wear that expression in real life. 

“Tris,”   says. “You have no other option.” 

“Eight!” 

“Tris,”  mother says. She smiles. She has a sweet smile. “We love .” 

“Seven!” 

“Shut up!” shout, holding up the gun.  do  .  shoot them. They understand. They’re 
asking  . They wouldn’t want   sacrifice myself for them. They aren’t even real. This is all a 
simulation. 

“Six!” 

 isn’t real.  doesn’t mean anything. My brother’s kind eyes feel like two drills boring a hole in 
 head. My sweat makes the gun slippery. 

“Five!” 

have no other option. close  eyes. Think. have  think. The urgency making  heart race 
depends on one thing,  one thing only: the threat   life. 

“Four! Three!” 

What did Tobias tell ? Selflessness  bravery aren’t that different. 

“Two!” 

release the trigger of  gun  drop  . Before  lose  nerve, turn  press  forehead 
 the barrel of the gun behind . 

Shoot  instead. 

“One!” 

hear a click,  a bang. 

The lights come on. stand alone in the empty room with the concrete walls, shaking. sink   
knees, wrapping  arms around  chest.  wasn’t cold when walked in, but   feels cold now. 
rub  arms  get rid of the goose bumps. 

have never felt relief like this before. Every muscle in  body relaxes at once  breathe 
freely again.  ’t imagine going through  fear landscape in  spare time, like Tobias does.  
seemed like bravery   before, but now   seems more like masochism. 

The door opens,  stand. Max, Eric, Tobias,  a few people  know walk into the room in 
a line, standing in a small crowd in front of . Tobias smiles at . 

“Congratulations, Tris,” says Eric. “You have successfully completed your final evaluation.” 

try  smile.  doesn’t work.  ’t shake the memory of the gun against  head.  still feel 
the barrel between  eyebrows. 

“Thanks,” say. 

“There is one more thing before   go  get ready for the welcoming banquet,”   says. He 
beckons  one of the unfamiliar people behind him. A woman with blue hair hands him a small black 
case. He opens    takes out a syringe  a long needle. 

tense up at the sight of  . The orange-brown liquid in the syringe reminds  of what they inject 
  with before simulations. And am supposed  be finished with those. 

“At least  aren’t afraid of needles,”   says. “This will inject  with a tracking device that will 
be activated only if  are reported missing. Just a precaution.” 

“How often do people go missing?” ask, frowning. 

“Not often.” Eric smirks. “This is a new development, courtesy of the Erudite. We have been 
injecting every Dauntless throughout the day,  assume all other factions will comply as soon as 
possible.” 

My stomach twists.  ’t let him inject  with anything, especially not anything developed by 
Erudite—maybe even by Jeanine. But also  ’t refuse.  ’t refuse or   will doubt  loyalty 
again. 

“All right,” say,  throat tight. 

Eric approaches  with the needle  syringe in hand. pull  hair away from  neck  tilt 
 head  the side. look away as Eric wipes  neck with an antiseptic wipe  eases the needle 
into  skin. The deep ache spreads through  neck, painful but brief. He puts the needle back in its 
case  sticks an adhesive bandage on the injection site. 

“The banquet is in two hours,”   says. “Your ranking among the other initiates, Dauntless-born 
included, will be announced then. Good luck.” 

The small crowd files out of the room, but Tobias lingers. He pauses by the door  beckons for 
  follow him, so do. The glass room above the Pit is full of Dauntless, some of them walking the 
ropes above our heads, some talking  laughing in groups. He smiles at . He must not have been 
watching. 

“heard a rumor that  only had seven obstacles  face,”   says. “Practically unheard of.” 

“You.. . weren’t watching the simulation?” 

“Only on the screens. The Dauntless leaders are the only ones who see the whole thing,”   says. 


“They seemed impressed.” 

“Well, seven fears isn’t as impressive as four,” reply, “but   will suffice.” 

“would be surprised if  weren’t ranked first,”   says. 

We walk into the glass room. The crowd is still there, but   is thinner now that the last person—me 
—has gone. 

People notice  after a few seconds. stay close  Tobias’s side as they point, but  ’t walk 
fast enough  avoid some cheers, some claps on the shoulder, some congratulations. As look at the 
people around , realize how strange they would look   father  brother,  how normal 
they seem  , despite all the metal rings in their faces  the tattoos on their arms  throats  
chests. smile back at them. 

We descend the steps into the Pit  say, “have a question.” bite  lip. “How much did they 
tell  about  fear landscape?” 

“Nothing, really. Why?”   says. 

“No reason.” kick a pebble  the side of the path. 

“Do  have  go back  the dormitory?”   asks. “Because if  want peace  quiet,   
stay with  until the banquet.” 

My stomach twists. 

“What is  ?”   asks. 

 want  go back  the dormitory,   want  be afraid of him. 

“Let’s go,” say. 

He closes the door behind    slips off his shoes. 

“Want some water?”   says. 

“No thanks.” hold  hands in front of . 

“You okay?”   says, touching  cheek. His hand cradles the side of  head, his long fingers 
slipping through  hair. He smiles  holds  head in place as   kisses . Heat spreads through 
 slowly. And fear, buzzing like an alarm in  chest. 

His lips still on mine,   pushes the jacket from  shoulders. flinch when hear   drop,  push 
him back,  eyes burning.  know why feel this  . didn’t feel like this when   kissed  
on the train. press  palms   face, covering  eyes. 

“What? What’s wrong?” 

shake  head. 

“Don’t tell   ’s nothing.” His voice is cold. He grabs  arm. “Hey. Look at .” 

take  hands from  face  lift  eyes  his. The hurt in his eyes  the anger in his 
clenched jaw surprise . 

“Sometimes wonder,” say, as calmly as , “what’s in   for . This...whatever   is.” 

“What’s in   for ,”   repeats. He steps back, shaking his head. “You’re an idiot, Tris.” 

“am not an idiot,” say. “Which is why know that  ’s a little weird that, of all the girls  
could have chosen,  chose . So if you’re just looking for...um,  know. ..that ...” 

“What? Sex?” He scowls at . “You know, if that was all wanted,  probably wouldn’t be the 
first person would go .” 

feel like   just punched  in the stomach. Of course   not the first person   would go to— 
not the first, not the prettiest, not desirable. press  hands   abdomen  look away, fighting 



off tears. am not the crying type. Nor am the yelling type. blink a few times, lower  hands,  
stare up at him. 

“  going  leave now,” say quietly. And turn toward the door. 

“No, Tris.” He grabs  wrist  wrenches  back. push him away, hard, but   grabs  other 
wrist, holding our crossed arms between  . 

“  sorry said that,”   says. “What meant was that  aren’t like that. Which knew when 
met .” 

“You were an obstacle in  fear landscape.” My lower lip wobbles. “Did  know that?” 

“What?” He releases  wrists,  the hurt look is back. “You’re afraid of ?” 

“Not ,” say. bite  lip  keep   still. “Being with ...with anyone. I’ve never been 
involved with someone before, ...you’re older,   know what your expectations are, 
...” 

“Tris,”   says sternly, “ know what delusion you’re operating under, but this is all new  
, too.” 

“Delusion?” repeat. “You mean  haven’t...” raise  eyebrows. “Oh. Oh. just assumed...” 
That because am so absorbed by him, everyone else must be too. “Um. You know.” 

“Well,  assumed wrong.” He looks away. His cheeks are bright, like  ’s embarrassed. “You  
tell  anything,  know,”   says. He takes  face in his hands, his fingertips cold  his palms 
warm. “am kinder than seemed in training. promise.” 

believe him. But this has nothing  do with his kindness. 

He kisses  between the eyebrows,  on the tip of  nose,  then carefully fits his mouth  
mine. am on edge. have electricity coursing through  veins instead of blood. want him  kiss 
, want him ; am afraid of where   might go. 

His hands shift   shoulders,  his fingers brush over the edge of  bandage. He pulls back 
with a puckered brow. 

“Are  hurt?”   asks. 

“No. ’s another tattoo. ’s healed, just...wanted  keep   covered up.” 

“Can see?” 

nod,  throat tight. pull  sleeve down  slip  shoulder out of  . He stares down at  
shoulder for a second,  then runs his fingers over  . They rise  fall with  bones, which stick 
out farther than I’d like. When   touches , feel like everywhere his skin meets mine is changed 
by the connection.  sends a thrill through  stomach. Not just fear. Something else, too. A wanting. 

He peels the corner of the bandage away. His eyes roam over the symbol of Abnegation,    
smiles. 

“have the same one,”   says, laughing. “On  back.” 

“Really? Can see  ?” 

He presses the bandage over the tattoo  pulls  shirt back over  shoulder. 

“Are  asking   undress, Tris?” 

A nervous laugh gurgles from  throat. “Only...partially.” 

He nods, his smile suddenly fading. He lifts his eyes  mine  unzips his sweatshirt.  slides 
from his shoulders,    tosses   onto the desk chair.  feel like laughing now. All  do is 
stare at him. 

His eyebrows pull  the center of his forehead,    grabs the hem of his T-shirt. In one swift 



motion,   pulls   over his head. 

A patch of Dauntless flames covers his right side, but other than that, his chest is unmarked. He 
averts his eyes. 

“What is  ?” ask, frowning. He looks...uncomfortable. 

“ invite many people  look at ,”   says. “Any people, actually.” 

“ ’t imagine why,” say softly. “mean, look at .” 

walk slowly around him. On his back is more ink than skin. The symbols of each faction are drawn 
there—Dauntless at the top of his spine, Abnegation just below  ,  the other three, smaller, 
beneath them. For a few seconds look at the scales that represent Candor, the eye that stands for 
Erudite,  the tree that symbolizes Amity.  makes sense that   would tattoo himself with the 
symbol of Dauntless, his refuge,  even the symbol of Abnegation, his place of origin, like did. 
But the other three? 

“think we’ve made a mistake,”   says softly. “We’ve all started  put down the virtues of the 
other factions in the process of bolstering our own.  want  do that. want  be brave,  
selfless,  smart,  kind,  honest.” He clears his throat. “continually struggle with kindness.” 

“No one’s perfect,” whisper. “ doesn’t work that  . One bad thing goes away,  another bad 
thing replaces  .” 

traded cowardice for cruelty; traded weakness for ferocity. 

brush over Abnegation’s symbol with  fingertips. “We have  warn them,  know. Soon.” 

“know,”   says. “We will.” 

He turns toward . want  touch him, but   afraid of his bareness; afraid that   will make  
bare too. 

“Is this scaring , Tris?” 

“No,” croak. clear  throat. “Not really.   only...afraid of what want.” 

“What do  want?” Then his face tightens. “Me?” 

Slowly nod. 

He nods too,  takes  hands in his gently. He guides  palms  his stomach. His eyes 
lowered,   pushes  hands up, over his abdomen  over his chest,  holds them against his 
neck. My palms tingle with the feel of his skin, smooth, warm. My face is hot, but shiver anyway. He 
looks at . 

“Someday,”   says, “if  still want , we ...” He pauses, clears his throat. “We ...” 

smile a little  wrap  arms around him before   finishes, pressing the side of  face  his 
chest. feel his heartbeat against  cheek, as fast as  own. 

“Are  afraid of , too, Tobias?” 

“Terrified,”   replies with a smile. 

turn  head  kiss the hollow beneath his throat. 

“Maybe  won’t be in  fear landscape anymore,” murmur. 

He bends his head  kisses  slowly. 

“Then everyone  call  Six.” 

“Four  Six,” say. 

We kiss again,  this time,   feels familiar. know exactly how we fit together, his arm around 
 waist,  hands on his chest, the pressure of his lips on mine. We have each other memorized. 

watch Tobias’s face carefully as we walk  the dining hall, searching for any sign of 
disappointment. We spent the two hours lying on his bed, talking  kissing  eventually dozing 
until we heard shouts in the hallway—people on their    the banquet. 

 anything,   seems lighter now than   was before. He smiles more, anyway. 

When we reach the entrance, we separate. go in first,  run  the table share with Will  
Christina. He enters second, a minute later,  sits down next  Zeke, who hands him a dark bottle. 
He waves   away. 

“Where did  go?” asks Christina. “Everyone else went back  the dormitory.” 

“just wandered around,” say. “was too nervous  talk  everyone else about  .” 

“You have no reason  be nervous,” Christina says, shaking her head. “turned around  talk  
Will for one second,   were already done.” 

detect a note of jealousy in her voice,  again, wish could explain that was well prepared for 
the simulation, because of what am. Instead just shrug. 

“What job are  going  pick?” ask her. 

“  thinking might want a job like Four’s. Training initiates,” she says. “Scaring the living 
daylights out of them. You know, fun stuff. What about ?” 

was so focused on getting through initiation that barely thought about  . could work for the 
Dauntless leaders—but they would kill  if they discover what am. What else is there? 

“guess...could be an ambassador  the other factions,” say. “think being a transfer would 
help .” 

“was so hoping  would say Dauntless-leader-in-training,” sighs Christina. “Because that’s what 
Peter wants. He couldn’t shut up about   in the dorm earlier.” 

“And  ’s what want,” adds Will. “Hopefully ranked higher than him...oh,  all the Dauntless- 
born initiates. Forgot about them.” He groans. “Oh God. This is going  be impossible.” 

“No,   isn’t,” she says. Christina reaches for his hand  laces her fingers with his, like  ’s the 
most natural thing in the world. Will squeezes her hand. 

“Question,” says Christina, leaning forward. “The leaders who were watching your fear landscape... 
they were laughing about something.” 

“Oh?” bite  lip hard. “  glad  terror amuses them.” 

“Any idea which obstacle   was?” she asks. 

“No.” 

“You’re lying,” she says. “You always bite the inside of your cheek when  lie. ’s your tell.” 

stop biting the inside of  cheek. 

“Will’s is pinching his lips together, if   makes  feel better,” she adds. 

Will covers his mouth immediately. 

“Okay, fine. was afraid of...intimacy,” say. 

“Intimacy,” repeats Christina. “Tike...sex?” 

tense up. And force myself  nod. Even if   was just Christina,  no one else was around, 
would still want  strangle her right now. go over a few ways  inflict maximum injury with 
minimum force in  head. try  throw flames from  eyes. 


Will laughs. 

“What was that like?” she says. “mean, did someone just...try  do   with ? Who was  ?” 

“Oh,  know. Faceless...unidentifiable male,” say. “How were your moths?” 

“You promised  would never tell!” cries Christina, smacking  arm. 

“Moths,” repeats Will. “You’re afraid of moths?” 

“Not just a cloud of moths,” she says, “like...a swarm of them. Everywhere. All those wings  
legs ...” She shudders  shakes her head. 

“Terrifying,” Will says with mock seriousness. “That’s  girl. Tough as cotton balls.” 

“Oh, shut up.” 

A microphone squeals somewhere, so loud clap  hands over  ears. look across the room at 
Eric, who stands on one of the tables with the microphone in hand, tapping   with his fingertips. After 
the tapping is done  the crowd of Dauntless is quiet, Eric clears his throat  begins. 

“We aren’t big on speeches here. Eloquence is for Erudite,”   says. The crowd laughs. wonder if 
they know that   was an Erudite once; that under all the pretense of Dauntless recklessness  even 
brutality,   is more like an Erudite than anything else.  they did, doubt they would laugh at him. 
“So   going  keep this short. ’s a new year,  we have a new pack of initiates. And a slightly 
smaller pack of new members. We offer them our congratulations.” 

At the word “congratulations” the room erupts, not into applause, but into the pounding of fists on 
tabletops. The noise vibrates in  chest,  grin. 

“We believe in bravery. We believe in taking action. We believe in freedom from fear  in 
acquiring the skills  force the bad out of our world so that the good  prosper  thrive.   
also believe in those things, we welcome .” 

Even though know Eric probably doesn’t believe in any of those things, find myself smiling, 
because believe in them. No matter how badly the leaders have warped the Dauntless ideals, those 
ideals  still belong  . 

More pounding fists, this time accompanied by whoops. 

“Tomorrow, in their first act as members, our top ten initiates will choose their professions, in the 
order of how they are ranked,” Eric says. “The rankings, know, are what everyone is really waiting 
for. They are determined by a combination of three scores—the first, from the combat stage of 
training; the second, from the simulation stage;  the third, from the final examination, the fear 
landscape. The rankings will appear on the screen behind .” 

As soon as the word “me” leaves his mouth, the names appear on the screen, which is almost as 
large as the wall itself. Next  the number one is  picture,  the name “Tris.” 

A weight in  chest lifts. didn’t realize   was there until   was gone,  didn’t have  feel   
anymore. smile,  a tingling spreads through . First. Divergent or not, this faction is where 
belong. 

forget about war; forget about death. Will’s arms wrap around     gives  a bear hug. 
hear cheering  laughing  shouting. Christina points at the screen, her eyes wide  filled with 
tears. 


1. Tris 

2. Uriah 

3. Lynn 



4. Marlene 

5. Peter 


Peter stays. suppress a sigh. But then read the rest of the names. 


6. Will 

7. Christina 


smile,  Christina reaches across the table  hug . am too distracted  protest against the 
affection. She laughs in  ear. 

Someone grabs  from behind  shouts in  ear. ’s Uriah.  ’t turn around, so reach back 
 squeeze his shoulder. 

“Congratulations!” shout. 

“You beat them!”   shouts back. He releases , laughing,  runs into a crowd of Dauntless- 
born initiates. 

crane  neck  look at the screen again. follow the list down. 

Eight, nine,  ten are Dauntless-borns whose names barely recognize. 

Eleven  twelve are Molly  Drew. 

Molly  Drew are cut. Drew, who tried  run away while Peter held  by the throat over the 
chasm,  Molly, who fed the Erudite lies about  father, are factionless. 

 isn’t quite the victory wanted, but  ’s a victory nonetheless. 

Will  Christina kiss, a little too sloppily for  taste. All around  is the pounding of 
Dauntless fists. Then feel a tap on  shoulder  turn  see Tobias standing behind . get up, 
beaming. 

“You think giving  a hug would give away too much?”   says. 

“You know,” say, “really  care.” 

stand on  tiptoes  press  lips  his. 

 is the best moment of  life. 

A moment later, Tobias’s thumb brushes over the injection site in  neck,  a few things come 
together at once.  know how didn’t figure this out before. 

One: Colored serum contains transmitters. 

Two: Transmitters connect the mind  a simulation program. 

Three: Erudite developed the serum. 

Four: Eric  Max are working with the Erudite. 

break away from the kiss  stare wide-eyed at Tobias. 

“Tris?”   says, confused. 

shake  head. “Not now.” meant  say not here. Not with Will  Christina standing a foot 
away from me—staring with open mouths, probably because just kissed Tobias—and the clamor of 
the Dauntless surrounding  . But   has  know how important   is. 

“Later,” say. “Okay?” 

He nods.  even know how I’ll explain   later.  even know how  think straight. 



But do know how Erudite will get    fight. 

try  get Tobias alone after the rankings are announced, but the crowd of initiates  members is 
too thick,  the force of their congratulations pulls him away from . decide  sneak out of the 
dormitory after everyone is asleep  find him, but the fear landscape exhausted  more than 
realized, so soon enough, drift off too. 

wake  squeaking mattresses  shuffling feet. ’s too dark for   see clearly, but as  eyes 
adjust, see that Christina is tying her shoelaces. open  mouth  ask her what she’s doing, but 
then notice that across from , Will is putting on a shirt. Everyone is awake, but everyone is silent. 

“Christina,” hiss. She doesn’t look at , so grab her shoulder  shake  . “Christina!” 

She just keeps tying her shoelaces. 

My stomach squeezes when see her face. Her eyes are open, but blank,  her facial muscles are 
slack. She moves without looking at what she’s doing, her mouth half-open, not awake but seeming 
awake. And everyone else looks just like her. 

“Will?” ask, crossing the room. All the initiates fall into a line when they finish dressing. They 
start  file silently out of the dormitory. grab Will’s arm  keep him from leaving, but   moves 
forward with irrepressible force. grit  teeth  hold on as hard as , digging  heels into the 
ground. He just drags  along with him. 

They are sleepwalkers. 

fumble for  shoes.  ’t stay here alone. tie  shoes in a hurry, pull on a jacket,  sprint 
out of the room, catching up  the line of initiates quickly, conforming  pace  theirs.  takes  
a few seconds  realize that they move in unison, the same foot forward as the same arm swings back. 
mimic them as best , but the rhythm feels strange  . 

We march toward the Pit, but when we reach the entrance, the front of the line turns left. Max 
stands in the hallway, watching  . My heart hammers in  chest  stare as vacantly as possible 
ahead of , focusing on the rhythm of  feet. tense as pass him. He’ll notice. He’ll notice   
not brain-dead like the rest of them  something bad will happen  , just know  . 

Max’s dark eyes pass right over . 

We climb a flight of stairs  travel at the same rhythm down four corridors. Then the hallway 
opens up  a huge cavern. Inside   is a crowd of Dauntless. 

There are rows of tables with mounds of black on them.  ’t see what the piles are until am a 
foot away from them. Guns. 

Of course. Eric said every Dauntless was injected yesterday. So now the entire faction is brain-dead, 
obedient,  trained  kill. Perfect soldiers. 

pick up a gun  a holster  a belt, copying Will, who is directly in front of . try  match 
his movements, but  ’t predict what  ’s going  do, so end up fumbling more than I’d like . 
grit  teeth. just have  trust that no one is watching . 

Once   armed, follow Will  the other initiates toward the exit. 

 ’t wage war against Abnegation, against  family. would rather die. My fear landscape 
proved that. My list of options narrows,  see the path must take. will pretend long enough  
get  the Abnegation sector of the city. will save  family. And whatever happens after that 
doesn’t matter. A blanket of calm settles over . 


The line of initiates passes into a dark hallway.  ’t see Will ahead of , or anything ahead of 
him. My foot hits something hard,  stumble,  hands outstretched. My knee hits something else 
—a step. straighten, so tense  teeth are almost chattering. They didn’t see that. ’s too dark. 
Please let   be too dark. 

As the staircase turns, light flows into the cavern, until  finally see Will’s shoulders in front of 
 again. focus on matching  rhythm  his as reach the top of the stairs, passing another 
Dauntless leader. Now know who the Dauntless leaders are, because they are the only people who are 
awake. 

Well, not the only people. must be awake because am Divergent. And if am awake, that means 
Tobias is too, unless am wrong about him. 

have  find him. 

stand next  the train tracks in a group that stretches as far as  see with  peripheral vision. 
The train is stopped in front of  , every car open. One by one,  fellow initiates climb into the train 
car in front of  . 

 ’t turn  head  scan the crowd for Tobias, but let  eyes skirt  the side. The faces on 
 left are unfamiliar, but see a tall boy with short hair a few yards   right.  might not be him, 
  ’t make sure, but  ’s the best chance have.  know how  get  him without 
attracting attention. have  get  him. 

The car in front of  fills up,  Will turns toward the next one. take  cues from him, but 
instead of stopping where   stops, slip a few feet  the right. The people around  are all taller 
than am; they will shield . step  the right again, clenching  teeth. Too much movement. 
They will catch . Please  catch . 

A blank-faced Dauntless in the next car offers a hand  the boy in front of ,    takes  , his 
movements robotic. take the next hand without looking at  ,  climb as gracefully as  into the 
car. 

stand facing the person who helped . My eyes twitch up, just for a second,  see his face. 
Tobias, as blank-faced as the rest of them. Was wrong? Is   not Divergent? Tears spark behind  
eyes,  blink them back as turn away from him. 

People crowd into the car around , so we stand in four rows, shoulder--shoulder. And then 
something peculiar happens: fingers lace with mine,  a palm presses   palm. Tobias, holding 
 hand. 

My entire body is alive with energy. squeeze his hand,    squeezes back. He is awake. was 
right. 

want  look at him, but force myself  stand still  keep  eyes forward as the train starts  
move. He moves his thumb in a slow circle over the back of  hand.  is meant  comfort , but   
frustrates  instead. need  talk  him. need  look at him. 

 ’t see where the train is going because the girl in front of  is so tall, so stare at the back of 
her head  focus on Tobias’s hand in mine until the rails squeal.  know how long I’ve been 
standing there, but  back aches, so   must have been a long time. The train screeches  a stop,  
 heart pounds so hard  ’s difficult  breathe. 

Right before we jump down from the car, see Tobias turn his head in  periphery,  glance 
back at him. His dark eyes are insistent as   says, “Run.” 

“My family,” say. 

look straight ahead again,  jump down from the train car when  ’s  turn. Tobias walks in 



front of . should focus on the back of his head, but the streets walk now are familiar,  the line 
of Dauntless follow fades from  attention. pass the place went every six months with  
mother  pick up new clothes for our family; the bus stop where once waited in the morning  get 
 school; the strip of sidewalk so cracked Caleb  played a hopping, jumping game  get across 
 . 

They are all different now. The buildings are dark  empty. The roads are packed with Dauntless 
soldiers, all marching at the same rhythm except the officers, who stand every few hundred yards, 
watching   walk by, or gathering in clusters  discuss something. No one seems  be doing 
anything. Are we really here for war? 

walk a half mile before get an answer  that question. 

start  hear popping sounds.  ’t look around  see where they’re coming from, but the farther 
walk, the louder  sharper they get, until recognize them as gunshots. clench  jaw. must 
keep walking; have  stare straight ahead. 

Far ahead of  , see a Dauntless soldier push a gray-clothed man  his knees. recognize the man 
—  is a council member. The soldier takes her gun out of her holster , with sightless eyes, fires a 
bullet into the back of the council member’s skull. 

The soldier has a gray streak in her hair. ’s Tori. My steps almost falter. 

Keep walking. My eyes burn. Keep walking. 

We march past Tori  the fallen council member. When step over his hand, almost burst into 
tears. 

Then the soldiers in front of  stop walking,  so do . stand as still as , but all want  
do is find Jeanine  Eric  Max  shoot them all. My hands are shaking   ’t do anything 
 stop  . breathe quickly through  nose. 

Another gunshot. From the corner of  left eye, see a gray blur collapse  the pavement. All the 
Abnegation will die if this continues. 

The Dauntless soldiers carry out unspoken orders without hesitation  without question. Some 
adult members of Abnegation are herded toward one of the nearby buildings, along with the 
Abnegation children. A sea of black-clothed soldiers guard the doors. The only people do not see are 
the Abnegation leaders. Maybe they are already dead. 

One by one, the Dauntless soldiers in front of  step away  perform one task or another. Soon 
the leaders will notice that whatever signals everyone else is getting,   not getting them. What will 
do when that happens? 

“This is insane,” coos a male voice on  right. see a lock of long, greasy hair,  a silver 
earring. Eric. He pokes  cheek with his index finger,  struggle against the impulse  slap his 
hand away. 

“They really  ’t see  ? Or hear  ?” a female voice asks. 

“Oh, they  see  hear. They just aren’t processing what they see  hear the same  ,” says 
Eric. “They receive commands from our computers in the transmitters we injected them with...” At 
this,   presses his fingers  the injection site  show the woman where   is. Stay still, tell myself. 
Still, still, still, “... carry them out seamlessly.” 

Eric shifts a step  the side  leans close  Tobias’s face, grinning. 

“Now, this is a happy sight,”   says. “The legendary Four. No one’s going  remember that came 
in second now, are they? No one’s going  ask , ‘What was   like  train with the guy who has 
only four fears ?’” He draws his gun  points   at Tobias’s right temple. My heart pounds so hard 



feel   in  skull. He  ’t shoot;   wouldn’t. Eric tilts his head. “Think anyone would notice if   
accidentally got shot?” 

“Go ahead,” the woman says, sounding bored. She must be a Dauntless leader if she  give Eric 
permission. “He’s nothing now.” 

“Too bad  didn’t just take Max up on his offer, Four. Well, too bad for , anyway,” says Eric 
quietly, as   clicks the bullet into its chamber. 

My lungs burn; haven’t breathed in almost a minute. see Tobias’s hand twitch in the corner of 
 eye, but  hand is already on  gun. press the barrel  Eric’s forehead. His eyes widen,  
his face goes slack,  for a second   looks like another sleeping Dauntless soldier. 

My index finger hovers over the trigger. 

“Get your gun away from his head,” say. 

“You won’t shoot ,” Eric replies. 

“Interesting theory,” say. But  ’t murder him;  ’t. grit  teeth  shift  arm down, 
firing at Eric’s foot. He screams  grabs his foot with both hands. The moment his gun is no longer 
pointed at Tobias’s head, Tobias draws his gun  fires at Eric’s friend’s leg.  wait  see if the 
bullet hits her. grab Tobias’s arm  sprint. 

 we  make    the alley, we  disappear into the buildings  they won’t find  . There are 
two hundred yards  go. hear footsteps behind  , but  look back. Tobias grabs  hand  
squeezes, pulling  forward, faster than have ever run, faster than  run. stumble behind him. 
hear a gunshot. 

The pain is sharp  sudden, beginning in  shoulder  spreading outward with electric fingers. 
A scream stops in  throat,  fall,  cheek scraping the pavement. lift  head  see 
Tobias’s knees by  face,  yell, “Run!” 

His voice is calm  quiet as   replies, “No.” 

In seconds we are surrounded. Tobias helps  up, supporting  weight. have trouble focusing 
through the pain. Dauntless soldiers surround    point their guns. 

“Divergent rebels,” Eric says, standing on one foot. His face is a sickly white. “Surrender your 
weapons.” 

lean heavily on Tobias. A gun barrel pressed   spine urges  forward, through the front doors 
of Abnegation headquarters, a plain gray building, two stories high. Blood trickles down  side.   
not afraid of what’s coming;   in too much pain  think about  . 

The gun barrel pushes  toward a door guarded by two Dauntless soldiers. Tobias  walk 
through    enter a plain office that contains just a desk, a computer,  two empty chairs. Jeanine 
sits behind the desk, a phone against her ear. 

“Well, send some of them back on the train, then,” she says. “ needs  be well guarded,  ’s the 
most important part—  not talk—have  go.” She snaps the phone shut  focuses her gray eyes 
on . They remind  of melted steel. 

“Divergent rebels,” one of the Dauntless says. He must be a Dauntless leader—or maybe a recruit 
who was removed from the simulation. 

“Yes,  see that.” She takes her glasses off, folds them,  sets them on the desk. She probably 
wears the glasses out of vanity rather than necessity, because she thinks they make her look smarter— 
 father said so. 

“You,” she says, pointing at , “expected. All the trouble with your aptitude test results made  
suspicious from the beginning. But ...” 

She shakes her head as she shifts her eyes  Tobias. 

“You, Tobias—or should call  Four?—managed  elude ,” she says quietly. “Everything 
about  checked out: test results, initiation simulations, everything. But here  are nonetheless.” 
She folds her hands  sets her chin on top of them. “Perhaps  could explain   how that is?” 

“You’re the genius,”   says coolly. “Why   tell ?” 

Her mouth curls into a smile. “My theory is that  really do belong in Abnegation. That your 
Divergence is weaker.” 

She smiles wider. Like she’s amused. grit  teeth  consider lunging across the table  
strangling her.  didn’t have a bullet in  shoulder, might. 

“Your powers of deductive reasoning are stunning,” spits Tobias. “Consider  awed.” 

look sideways at him. had almost forgotten about this side of him—the part that is more likely  
explode than  lie down  die. 

“Now that your intelligence has been verified,  might want  get on with killing  .” Tobias 
closes his eyes. “You have a lot of Abnegation leaders  murder, after all.” 

 Tobias’s comments bother Jeanine, she doesn’t let on. She keeps smiling  stands smoothly. 
She wears a blue dress that hugs her body from shoulder  knee, revealing a layer of pudge around her 
middle. The room spins as try  focus on her face,  slump against Tobias for support. He slides 
his arm around , supporting  from the waist. 

“Don’t be silly. There is no rush,” she says lightly. “You are both here for an extremely important 
purpose. You see,   perplexed  that the Divergent were immune  the serum that developed, so 
have been working  remedy that. thought might have, with the last batch, but as  know, was 
wrong. Luckily have another batch  test.” 

“Why bother?” She  the Dauntless leaders had no problem killing the Divergent in the past. Why 
would   be any different now? 


She smirks at . 

“have had a question since began the Dauntless project,    is this.” She sidesteps her desk, 
skimming the surface with her finger. “Why are most of the Divergent weak-willed, God-fearing 
nobodies from Abnegation, of all factions?” 

didn’t know that most of the Divergent came from Abnegation,   know why that would 
be. And probably won’t live long enough  figure   out. 

“Weak-willed,” Tobias scoffs. “ requires a strong will  manipulate a simulation, last time 
checked. Weak-willed is mind-controlling an army because  ’s too hard for   train one yourself.” 

“am not a fool,” says Jeanine. “A faction of intellectuals is no army. We are tired of being 
dominated by a bunch of self-righteous idiots who reject wealth  advancement, but we couldn’t do 
this on our own. And your Dauntless leaders were all too happy  oblige  if guaranteed them a 
place in our new, improved government.” 

“Improved,” Tobias says, snorting. 

“Yes, improved,” Jeanine says. “Improved,  working toward a world in which people will live in 
wealth, comfort,  prosperity.” 

“At whose expense?” ask,  voice thick  sluggish. “All that wealth...doesn’t come from 
nowhere.” 

“Currently, the factionless are a drain on our resources,” Jeanine replies. “As is Abnegation. am 
sure that once the remains of your old faction are absorbed into the Dauntless army, Candor will 
cooperate  we will finally be able  get on with things.” 

Absorbed into the Dauntless army. know what that means—she wants  control them, too. She 
wants everyone  be pliable  easy  control. 

“Get on with things,” Tobias repeats bitterly. He raises his voice. “Make no mistake. You will be 
dead before the day is out, you—” 

“Perhaps if  could control your temper,” Jeanine says, her words cutting cleanly across Tobias’s, 
“you would not be in this situation  begin with, Tobias.” 

“  in this situation because  put  here,”   snaps. “The second  orchestrated an attack 
against innocent people.” 

“Innocent people.” Jeanine laughs. “find that a little funny, coming from . would expect 
Marcus’s son  understand that not all those people are innocent.” She perches on the edge of the 
desk, her skirt pulling away from her knees, which are crossed with stretch marks. “Can  tell  
honestly that  wouldn’t be happy  discover that your father was killed in the attack?” 

“No,” says Tobias through gritted teeth. “But at least his evil didn’t involve the widespread 
manipulation of an entire faction  the systematic murder of every political leader we have.” 

They stare at each other for a few seconds, long enough  make  feel tense   core,  then 
Jeanine clears her throat. 

“What was going  say,” she says, “is that soon, dozens of the Abnegation  their young 
children will be  responsibility  keep in order,    does not bode well for  that a large 
number of them may be Divergent like yourselves, incapable of being controlled by the simulations.” 

She stands  walks a few steps  the left, her hands clasped in front of her. Her nail beds, like 
mine, are bitten raw. 

“Therefore,   was necessary that develop a new form of simulation  which they are not immune. 
have been forced  reassess  own assumptions. That is where  come in.” She paces a few 



steps  the right. “You are correct  say that  are strong-willed. cannot control your will. But 
there are a few things  control.” 

She stops  turns  face  . lean  temple into Tobias’s shoulder. Blood trails down  back. 
The pain has been so constant for the past few minutes that have gotten used   , like a person gets 
used  a siren’s wail if   remains consistent. 

She presses her palms together. see no vicious glee in her eyes,  not a hint of the sadism 
expect. She is more machine than maniac. She sees problems  forms solutions based on the data 
she collects. Abnegation stood in the   of her desire for power, so she found a    eliminate  . 
She didn’t have an army, so she found one in Dauntless. She knew that she would need  control large 
groups of people in order  stay secure, so she developed a    do   with serums  transmitters. 
Divergence is just another problem for her  solve,  that is what makes her so terrifying—because 
she is smart enough  solve anything, even the problem of our existence. 

“  control what  see  hear,” she says. “So created a new serum that will adjust your 
surroundings  manipulate your will. Those who refuse  accept our leadership must be closely 
monitored.” 

Monitored—or robbed of free will. She has a gift with words. 

“You will be the first test subject, Tobias. Beatrice, however...” She smiles. “You are too injured  
be of much use  , so your execution will occur at the conclusion of this meeting.” 

try  hide the shudder that goes through  at the word “execution,”  shoulder screaming with 
pain,  look up at Tobias. ’s hard  blink the tears back when see the terror in Tobias’s wide, 
dark eyes. 

“No,” says Tobias. His voice trembles, but his look is stern as   shakes his head. “would rather 
die.” 

“  afraid   have much of a choice in the matter,” replies Jeanine lightly. 

Tobias takes  face in his hands roughly  kisses , the pressure of his lips pushing mine 
apart. forget  pain  the terror of approaching death  for a moment, am grateful that the 
memory of that kiss will be fresh in  mind as meet  end. 

Then   releases   have  lean against the wall for support. With no more warning than the 
tightening of his muscles, Tobias lunges across the desk  wraps his hands around Jeanine’s throat. 
Dauntless guards by the door leap at him, their guns held ready,  scream. 

 takes two Dauntless soldiers  pull Tobias away from Jeanine  shove him  the ground. One 
of the soldiers pins him, his knees on Tobias’s shoulders  his hands on Tobias’s head, pressing his 
face  the carpet. lunge toward them, but another guard slams his hands against  shoulders, 
forcing  against the wall. am weak from blood loss  too small. 

Jeanine braces herself against the desk, spluttering  gasping. She rubs her throat, which is bright 
red with Tobias’s fingerprints. No matter how mechanical she seems, she’s still human; there are tears 
in her eyes as she takes a box from her desk drawer  opens  , revealing a needle  syringe. 

Still breathing heavily, she carries   toward Tobias. Tobias grits his teeth  elbows one of the 
guards in the face. The guard slams the heel of his gun into the side of Tobias’s head,  Jeanine 
sticks the needle into Tobias’s neck. He goes limp. 

A sound escapes  mouth, not a sob or a scream, but a croaking, scraping moan that sounds 
detached, like   is coming from someone else. 

“Let him up,” says Jeanine, her voice scratchy. 

The guard gets up,  so does Tobias. He does not look like the sleepwalking Dauntless soldiers; 



his eyes are alert. He looks around for a few seconds as if confused by what   sees. 

“Tobias,” say. “Tobias!” 

“He doesn’t know ,” says Jeanine. 

Tobias looks over his shoulder. His eyes narrow    starts toward , fast. Before the guards  
stop him,   closes a hand around  throat, squeezing  trachea with his fingertips. choke,  
face hot with blood. 

“The simulation manipulates him,” says Jeanine.  barely hear her over the pounding in  
ears. “By altering what   sees—making him confuse enemy with friend.” 

One of the guards pulls Tobias off . gasp, drawing a rattling breath into  lungs. 

He is gone. Controlled by the simulation,   will now murder the people   called innocent not 
three minutes ago. Jeanine killing him would have hurt less than this. 

“The advantage  this version of the simulation,” she says, her eyes alight, “is that    act 
independently,  is therefore far more effective than a mindless soldier.” She looks at the guards 
who hold Tobias back. He struggles against them, his muscles taut, his eyes focused on , but not 
seeing , not seeing  the   they used . “Send him  the control room. We’ll want a sentient 
being there  monitor things , as understand  ,   used  work there.” 

Jeanine presses her palms together in front of her. “And take her  room B13,” she says. She flaps 
her hand  dismiss . That flapping hand commands  execution, but  her   is just crossing off 
an item from a list of tasks, the only logical progression of the particular path that she is on. She 
surveys  without feeling as two Dauntless soldiers pull  out of the room. 

They drag  down the hallway. feel numb inside, but outside am a screaming, thrashing force 
of will. bite a hand that belongs  the Dauntless man on  right  smile as taste blood. Then   
hits ,  there is nothing. 

wake in the dark, wedged in a hard corner. The floor beneath  is smooth  cold. touch  
throbbing head  liquid slips across  fingertips. Red—blood. When bring  hand back down, 
 elbow hits a wall. Where am ? 

A light flickers above . The bulb is blue  dim when  ’s lit. see the walls of a tank around 
,   shadowed reflection across from . The room is small, with concrete walls  no 
windows,  am alone in  . Well, almost—a small video camera is attached  one of the concrete 
walls. 

see a small opening near  feet. Connected    is a tube,  connected  the tube, in the corner 
of the room, is a huge tank. 

The trembling starts in  fingertips  spreads up  arms,  soon  body is shuddering. 

  not in a simulation this time. 

My right arm is numb. When push myself out of the corner, see a pool of blood where was 
sitting.  ’t panic now. stand, leaning against a wall,  breathe. The worst thing that  happen 
  now is that drown in this tank. press  forehead  the glass  laugh. That is the worst 
thing  imagine. My laugh turns into a sob. 

 refuse  give up now,   will look brave  whoever watches  with that camera, but 
sometimes   isn’t fighting that’s brave,  ’s facing the death  know is coming. sob into the glass. 
  not afraid of dying, but want  die a different  , any other  . 

 is better  scream than cry, so scream  slam  heel into the wall behind . My foot 
bounces off,  kick again, so hard  heel throbs. kick again  again  again, then pull back 
 throw  left shoulder into the wall. The impact makes the wound in  right shoulder burn like 
  got stuck with a hot poker. 

Water trickles into the bottom of the tank. 

The video camera means they’re watching me—no, studying , as only the Erudite would. To see 
if  reaction in reality matches  reaction in the simulation. To prove that   a coward. 

uncurl  fists  drop  hands. am not a coward. lift  head  stare at the camera 
across from .  focus on breathing,  forget that   about  die. stare at the camera until 
 vision narrows    is all see. Water tickles  ankles, then  calves, then  thighs.  rises 
over  fingertips. breathe in; breathe out. The water is soft  feels like silk. 

breathe in. The water will wash  wounds clean. breathe out. My mother submerged  in 
water when was a baby,  give   God.  has been a long time since thought about God, but 
think about him now.  is only natural. am glad, suddenly, that shot Eric in the foot instead of the 
head. 

My body rises with the water. Instead of kicking  feet  stay abreast of  , push all the air from 
 lungs  sink  the bottom. The water muffles  ears. feel its movement over  face. think 
about snorting the water into  lungs so   kills  faster, but  ’t bring myself  do  . blow 
bubbles from  mouth. 

Relax. close  eyes. My lungs burn. 

let  hands float up  the top of the tank. let the water fold  in its silken arms. 

When was young,  father used  hold  over his head  run with  so felt like was 


flying. remember how the air felt, gliding over  body,  am not afraid. open  eyes. 

A dark figure stands in front of . must be close  death if   seeing things. Pain stabs  
lungs. Suffocating is painful. A palm presses  the glass in front of  face,  for a moment as 
stare through the water, think see  mother’s blurry face. 

hear a bang,  the glass cracks. Water sprays out a hole near the top of the tank,  the pane 
cracks in half. turn away as the glass shatters,  the force of the water throws  body at the 
ground. gasp, swallowing water as well as air,  cough,  gasp again,  hands close around  
arms,  hear her voice. 

“Beatrice,” she says. “Beatrice, we have  run.” 

She pulls  arm across her shoulders  hauls    feet. She is dressed like  mother  
she looks like  mother, but she is holding a gun,  the determined look in her eyes is unfamiliar 
 . stumble beside her over broken glass  through water  out an open doorway. Dauntless 
guards lie dead next  the door. 

My feet slip  slide on the tile as we walk down the hallway, as fast as  weak legs  muster. 
When we turn the corner, she fires at the two guards standing by the door at the end. The bullets hit 
them both in the head,  they slump  the floor. She pushes  against the wall  takes off her 
gray jacket. 

She wears a sleeveless shirt. When she lifts her arm, see the corner of a tattoo under her armpit. 
No wonder she never changed clothes in front of . 

“Mom,” say,  voice strained. “You were Dauntless.” 

“Yes,” she says, smiling. She makes her jacket into a sling for  arm, tying the sleeves around  
neck. “And   has served  well today. Your father  Caleb  some others are hiding in a 
basement at the intersection of North  Fairfield. We have  go get them.” 

stare at her. sat next  her at the kitchen table, twice a day, for sixteen years,  never once did 
consider the possibility that she could have been anything but Abnegation-born. How well did 
actually know  mother? 

“There will be time for questions,” she says. She lifts her shirt  slips a gun from under the 
waistband of her pants, offering    . Then she touches  cheek. “Now we must go.” 

She runs  the end of the hallway,  run after her. 

We are in the basement of Abnegation headquarters. My mother has worked there for as long as 
 remember, so   not surprised when she leads  down a few dark hallways, up a dank staircase, 
 into daylight again without interference. How many Dauntless guards did she shoot before she 
found ? 

“How did  know  find ?” say. 

“I’ve been watching the trains since the attacks started,” she replies, glancing over her shoulder at 
. “didn’t know what would do when found . But   was always  intention  save .” 

My throat feels tight. “But betrayed . left .” 

“You’re  daughter.  care about the factions.” She shakes her head. “Look where they got 
 . Human beings as a whole cannot be good for long before the bad creeps back in  poisons   
again.” 

She stops where the alley intersects with the road. 

know now isn’t the time for conversation. But there is something need  know. 

“Mom, how do  know about Divergence?” ask. “What is  ? Why...” 



She pushes the bullet chamber open  peers inside. Seeing how many bullets she has left. Then 
takes a few out of her pocket  reloads. recognize her expression as the one she wears when she 
threads a needle. 

“know about them because am one,” she says as she shoves a bullet in place. “was only safe 
because  mother was a Dauntless leader. On Choosing Day, she told   leave  faction  
find a safer one. chose Abnegation.” She puts an extra bullet in her pocket  stands up straighten 
“But wanted   make the choice on your own.” 

“ understand why we’re such a threat  the leaders.” 

“Every faction conditions its members  think  act a certain  . And most people do  . For 
most people,  ’s not hard  learn,  find a pattern of thought that works  stay that  .” She 
touches  uninjured shoulder  smiles. “But our minds move in a dozen different directions. We 
 ’t be confined  one   of thinking,  that terrifies our leaders.  means we  ’t be 
controlled. And   means that no matter what they do, we will always cause trouble for them.” 

feel like someone breathed new air into  lungs. am not Abnegation. am not Dauntless. 

am Divergent. 

And  ’t be controlled. 

“Here they come,” she says, looking around the corner. peek over her shoulder  see a few 
Dauntless with guns, moving  the same beat, heading toward  . My mother looks back. Far behind 
 , another group of Dauntless run down the alley, toward  , moving in time with one another. 

She grabs  hands  looks  in the eyes. watch her long eyelashes move as she blinks. wish 
had something of hers in  small, plain face. But at least have something of hers in  brain. 

“Go  your father  brother. The alley on the right, down  the basement. Knock twice, then 
three times, then six times.” She cups  cheeks. Her hands are cold; her palms are rough. “  going 
 distract them. You have  run as fast as  .” 

“No.” shake  head. “  not going anywhere without .” 

She smiles. “Be brave, Beatrice. love .” 

feel her lips on  forehead  then she runs into the middle of the street. She holds her gun 
above her head  fires three times into the air. The Dauntless start running. 

sprint across the street  into the alley. As run, look over  shoulder  see if any Dauntless 
follow . But  mother fires into the crowd of guards,  they are too focused on her  notice . 

whip  head over  shoulder when hear them fire back. My feet falter  stop. 

My mother stiffens, her back arching. Blood surges from a wound in her abdomen, dyeing her shirt 
crimson. A patch of blood spreads over her shoulder. blink,  the violent red stains the inside of 
 eyelids. blink again,  see her smile as she sweeps  hair trimmings into a pile. 

She falls, first  her knees, her hands limp at her sides,  then  the pavement, slumped  the 
side like a rag doll. She is motionless  without breath. 

clamp  hand over  mouth  scream into  palm. My cheeks are hot  wet with tears 
didn’t feel beginning. My blood cries out that   belongs  her,  struggles  return  her,  
hear her words in  mind as run, telling   be brave. 

Pain stabs through  as everything am made of collapses,  entire world dismantled in a 
moment. The pavement scrapes  knees.  lie down now, this  all be done. Maybe Eric was 
right,  choosing death is like exploring an unknown, uncertain place. 

feel Tobias brushing  hair back before the first simulation. hear him telling   be brave. hear  mother telling   be brave. 

The Dauntless soldiers turn as if moved by the same mind. Somehow get up  start running. 
am brave. 

Three Dauntless soldiers pursue . They run in unison, their footsteps echoing in the alley. One 
of them fires,  dive, scraping  palms on the ground. The bullet hits the brick wall   right, 
 pieces of brick spray everywhere. throw myself around the corner  click a bullet into the 
chamber of  gun. 

They killed  mother. point the gun into the alley  fire blindly.  wasn’t really them, but   
doesn’t matter— ’t matter,  just like death itself,  ’t be real right now. 

Just one set of footsteps now. hold the gun out with both hands  stand at the end of the alley, 
pointing at the Dauntless soldier. My finger squeezes the trigger, but not hard enough  fire. The man 
running toward  is not a man,   is a boy. A shaggy-haired boy with a crease between his eyebrows. 

Will. Dull-eyed  mindless, but still Will. He stops running  mirrors , his feet planted  
his gun up. In an instant, see his finger poised over the trigger  hear the bullet slide into the 
chamber,  fire. My eyes squeezed shut. Can’t breathe. 

The bullet hit him in the head. know because that’s where aimed  . 

turn around without opening  eyes  stumble away from the alley. North  Fairfield. have 
 look at the street sign  see where am, but  ’t read  ;  vision is blurred. blink a few 
times. stand just yards away from the building that contains what’s left of  family. 

kneel next  the door. Tobias would call  unwise  make any noise. Noise might attract 
Dauntless soldiers. 

press  forehead  the wall  scream. After a few seconds clamp  hand over  mouth  
muffle the sound  scream again, a scream that turns into a sob. The gun clatters  the ground. 
still see Will. 

He smiles in  memory. A curled lip. Straight teeth. Light in his eyes. Laughing, teasing, more 
alive in memory than am in reality.  was him or . chose . But feel dead too. 

pound on the door—twice, then three times, then six times, as  mother told  . 

wipe the tears from  face. This is the first time will see  father since left him,   
want him  see  half-collapsed  sobbing. 

The door opens,  Caleb stands in the doorway. The sight of him stuns . He stares at  for a 
few seconds  then throws his arms around , his hand pressing  the wound in  shoulder. 
bite  lip  keep from crying out, but a groan escapes  anyway,  Caleb yanks back. 

“Beatrice. Oh God, are  shot?” 

“Let’s go inside,” say weakly. 

He drags his thumb under his eyes, catching the moisture. The door falls shut behind  . 

The room is dimly lit, but see familiar faces, former neighbors  classmates   father’s 
coworkers. My father, who stares at  like I’ve grown a second head. Marcus. The sight of him 
makes  ache—Tobias... 

No. will not do that; will not think of him. 

“How did  know about this place?” Caleb says. “Did Mom find ?” 

nod.  want  think about Mom, either. 

“My shoulder,” say. 


Now that am safe, the adrenaline that propelled  here is fading,  the pain is getting worse. 
sink   knees. Water drips from  clothes onto the cement floor. A sob rises within , desperate 
for release,  choke   back. 

A woman named Tessa who lived down the street from   rolls out a pallet. She was married  a 
council member, but  see him here. He is probably dead. 

Someone else carries a lamp from one corner  the other so we have light. Caleb produces a first- 
aid kit,  Susan brings  a bottle of water. There is no better place  need help than a room full of 
members of Abnegation. glance at Caleb. He’s wearing gray again. Seeing him in the Erudite 
compound feels like a dream now. 

My father comes  , lifts  arm across his shoulders,  helps  across the room. 

“Why are  wet?” Caleb says. 

“They tried  drown ,” say. “Why are  here?” 

“did what  said—what Mom said. researched the simulation serum  found out that Jeanine 
was working  develop long-range transmitters for the serum so its signal could stretch farther, which 
led   information about Erudite  Dauntless...anyway, dropped out of initiation when 
figured out what was happening. would have warned , but   was too late,”   says. “  
factionless now.” 

“No,  aren’t,”  father says sternly. “You’re with  .” 

kneel on the pallet  Caleb cuts a piece of  shirt away from  shoulder with a pair of 
medical scissors. Caleb peels the square of fabric away, revealing first the Abnegation tattoo on  
right shoulder  second, the three birds on  collarbone. Caleb   father stare at both tattoos 
with the same look of fascination  shock but say nothing about them. 

lie on  stomach. Caleb squeezes  palm as  father gets the antiseptic from the first aid kit. 

“Have  ever taken a bullet out of someone before?” ask, a shaky laugh in  voice. 

“The things know how  do might surprise ,”   replies. 

A lot of things about  parents might surprise . think of Mom’s tattoo  bite  lip. 

“This will hurt,”   says. 

 see the knife go in, but feel  . Pain spreads through  body  scream through gritted 
teeth, crushing Caleb’s hand. Over the screaming, hear  father ask   relax  back. Tears run 
from the corners of  eyes  do as   tells . The pain starts again,  feel the knife moving 
under  skin,  am still screaming. 

“Got  ,”   says. He drops something on the floor with a ding. 

Caleb looks at  father  then at ,  then   laughs. haven’t heard him laugh in so long 
that the sound makes  cry. 

“What’s so funny?” say, sniffling. 

“never thought would see   together again,”   says. 

My father cleans the skin around  wound with something cold. “Stitching time,”   says. 

nod. He threads the needle like  ’s done   a thousand times. 

“One,”   says, “two ...three.” 

clench  jaw  stay quiet this time. Of all the pain have suffered today—the pain of getting 
shot  almost drowning  taking the bullet out again, the pain of finding  losing  mother 
 Tobias, this is the easiest  bear. 

My father finishes stitching  wound, ties off the thread,  covers the stitches with a bandage. 



Caleb helps  sit up  separates the hems of his two shirts, pulling the long-sleeved one over his 
head  offering    . 

My father helps  guide  right arm through the shirt sleeve,  pull the rest over  head.  
is baggy  smells fresh, smells like Caleb. 

“So,”  father says quietly. “Where is your mother?” 

look down.  want  deliver this news.  want  have this news  begin with. 

“She’s gone,” say. “She saved .” 

Caleb closes his eyes  takes a deep breath. 

My father looks momentarily stricken  then recovers himself, averting his glistening eyes  
nodding. 

“That is good,”   says, sounding strained. “A good death.” 

 speak right now, will break down,   ’t afford  do that. So just nod. 

Eric called Al’s suicide brave,    was wrong. My mother’s death was brave. remember how 
calm she was, how determined.  isn’t just brave that she died for ;   is brave that she did   
without announcing  , without hesitation,  without appearing  consider another option. 

He helps    feet. Time  face the rest of the room. My mother told   save them. 
Because of that,  because am Dauntless,  ’s  duty  lead now. have no idea how  bear that 
burden. 

Marcus gets up. A vision of him whipping  arm with a belt rushes into  mind when see him, 
  chest squeezes. 

“We are only safe here for so long,” Marcus says eventually. “We need  get out of the city. Our 
best option is  go  the Amity compound in the hope that they’ll take   in. Do  know anything 
about the Dauntless strategy, Beatrice? Will they stop fighting at night?” 

“’s not Dauntless strategy,” say. “This whole thing is masterminded by the Erudite. And  ’s not 
like they’re giving orders.” 

“Not giving orders,”  father says. “What do  mean?” 

“mean,” say, “ninety percent of the Dauntless are sleepwalking right now. They’re in a 
simulation  they  know what they’re doing. The only reason   not just like them is that 
 ...” hesitate on the word. “The mind control doesn’t affect .” 

“Mind control? So they  know that they’re killing people right now?”  father asks , his 
eyes wide. 

“No.” 

“That’s...awful.” Marcus shakes his head. His sympathetic tone sounds manufactured  . 
“Waking up  realizing what you’ve done...” 

The room goes quiet, probably as all the Abnegation imagine themselves in the place of the 
Dauntless soldiers,  that’s when   occurs  . 

“We have  wake them up,” say. 

“What?” Marcus says. 

“ we wake the Dauntless up, they will probably revolt when they realize what’s going on,” 
explain. “The Erudite won’t have an army. The Abnegation will stop dying. This will be over.” 

“ won’t be that simple,”  father says. “Even without the Dauntless helping them, the Erudite 
will find another   to—” 

“And how are we supposed  wake them up?” Marcus says. 



“We find the computers that control the simulation  destroy the data,” say. “The program. 
Everything.” 

“Easier said than done,” Caleb says. “ could be anywhere. We  ’t just appear at the Erudite 
compound  start poking around.” 

“’s...” frown. Jeanine. Jeanine was talking about something important when Tobias  came 
into her office, important enough  hang up on someone. You  ’t just leave   undefended. And 
then, when she was sending Tobias away: Send him  the control room. The control room where 
Tobias used  work. With the Dauntless security monitors. And the Dauntless computers. 

“’s at Dauntless headquarters,” say. “ makes sense. That’s where all the data about the 
Dauntless is stored, so why not control them from there?” 

faintly register that said them. As of yesterday, technically became Dauntless, but  feel 
like one. And am not Abnegation, either. 

guess am what I’ve always been. Not Dauntless, not Abnegation, not factionless. Divergent. 

“Are  sure?”  father asks. 

“’s an informed guess,” say, “and  ’s the best theory have.” 

“Then we’ll have  decide who goes  who continues on  Amity,”   says. “What kind of help do  need, Beatrice?” 

The question stuns , as does the expression   wears. He looks at  like   a peer. He speaks 
  like   a peer. Either   has accepted that am an adult now, or   has accepted that am no 
longer his daughter. The latter is more likely,  more painful. 

“Anyone who   will fire a gun,” say, “and isn’t afraid of heights.” 

Erudite  Dauntless forces are concentrated in the Abnegation sector of the city, so as long as we 
run away from the Abnegation sector, we are less likely  encounter difficulty. 

didn’t get  decide who is coming with . Caleb was the obvious choice, since   knows the 
most about the Erudite plan. Marcus insisted that   go, despite  protests, because   is good with 
computers. And  father acted like his place was assumed from the beginning. 

watch the others run in the opposite direction—toward safety, toward Amity—for a few seconds, 
 then turn away, toward the city, toward the war. We stand next  the railroad tracks, which will 
carry   into danger. 

“What time is  ?” ask Caleb. 

He checks his watch. “Three twelve.” 

“Should be here any second,” say. 

“Will   stop?”   asks. 

shake  head. “ goes slowly through the city. We’ll run next  the car for a few feet  then 
climb inside.” 

Jumping on trains seems easy   now, natural.  won’t be as easy for the rest of them, but we 
 ’t stop now. look over  left shoulder  see the headlights burning gold against the gray 
buildings  roads. bounce on the balls of  feet as the lights grow larger  larger,  then the 
front of the train glides past ,  start jogging. When see an open car, pick up  pace  keep 
stride with    grab the handle on the left, swinging myself inside. 

Caleb jumps, landing hard  rolling on his side  get in,    helps Marcus. My father lands on 
his stomach, pulling his legs in behind him. They move away from the doorway, but stand on the 
edge with one hand on a handle, watching the city pass. 

 were Jeanine, would send the majority of Dauntless soldiers  the Dauntless entrance above 
the Pit, outside the glass building.  would be smarter  go in the back entrance, the one that requires 
jumping off a building. 

“assume  now regret choosing Dauntless,” Marcus says. 

am surprised  father didn’t ask that question, but  , like , is watching the city. The train 
passes the Erudite compound, which is dark now.  looks peaceful from a distance,  inside those 
walls,   probably is peaceful. Far removed from the conflict  the reality of what they have done. 

shake  head. 

“Not even after your faction’s leaders decided  join in a plot  overthrow the government?” 
Marcus spits. 

“There were some things needed  learn.” 

“How  be brave?”  father says quietly. 

“How  be selfless,” say. “Often they’re the same thing.” 

“Is that why  got Abnegation’s symbol tattooed on your shoulder?” Caleb asks. am almost sure 
that see a smile in  father’s eyes. 

smile faintly back  nod. “And Dauntless on the other.” 

The glass building above the Pit reflects sunlight into  eyes. stand, holding the handle next  the 


door for balance. Almost there. 

“When tell   jump,” say, “you jump, as far as  .” 

“Jump?” Caleb asks. “We’re seven stories up, Tris.” 

“Onto a roof,” add. Seeing the stunned look on his face, say, “That’s why they call   a test of 
bravery.” 

Half of bravery is perspective. The first time did this,   was one of the hardest things had ever 
done. Now, preparing  jump off a moving train is nothing, because have done more difficult things 
in the past few weeks than most people will in a lifetime. And yet none of   compares  what am 
about  do in the Dauntless compound.  survive, will undoubtedly go on  do far more difficult 
things than even that, like live without a faction, something never imagined possible. 

“Dad,  go,” say, stepping back so    stand by the edge.     Marcus go first,  
time   so they have  jump the shortest distance. Hopefully Caleb   jump far enough  make 
 , because we’re younger. ’s a chance have  take. 

The train tracks curve,  when they line up with the edge of the roof, shout, “Jump!” 

My father bends his knees  launches himself forward.  wait  see if   makes  . shove 
Marcus forward  shout, “Jump!” 

My father lands on the roof, so close  the edge that gasp. He sits down on the gravel,  push 
Caleb in front of . He stands at the edge of the train car  jumps without  having  tell him . 
take a few steps back  give myself a running start  leap out of the car just as the train reaches 
the end of the roof. 

For an instant am suspended in nothingness,  then  feet slam into cement  stumble  
the side, away from the roof’s edge. My knees ache,  the impact shudders through  body, 
making  shoulder throb. sit down, breathing hard,  look across the rooftop. Caleb   
father stand at the edge of the roof, their hands around Marcus’s arms. He didn’t make  , but   hasn’t 
fallen yet. 

Somewhere inside , a vicious voice chants: fall, fall, fall. 

But   doesn’t. My father  Caleb haul him onto the roof. stand up, brushing gravel off  
pants. The thought of what comes next has  preoccupied.  is one thing  ask people  jump off a 
train, but a roof? 

“This next part is why asked about fear of heights,” say, walking  the edge of the roof. hear 
their shuffling footsteps behind   step onto the ledge. Wind rushes up the side of the building 
 lifts  shirt from  skin. stare down at the hole in the ground, seven stories below ,  
then close  eyes as the air blows over  face. 

“There’s a net at the bottom,” say, looking over  shoulder. They look confused. They haven’t 
figured out what am asking them  do yet. 

“Don’t think,” say. “Just jump.” 

turn,  as turn, lean back, compromising  balance. drop like a stone,  eyes closed, one 
arm outstretched  feel the wind. relax  muscles as much as  before hit the net, which feels 
like a slab of cement hitting  shoulder. grit  teeth  roll  the edge, grabbing the pole that 
supports the net,  swing  leg over the side. land on  knees on the platform,  eyes blurry 
with tears. 

Caleb yelps as the net curls around his body  then straightens. stand with some difficulty. 

“Caleb!” hiss. “Over here!” 

Breathing heavily, Caleb crawls  the side of the net  drops over the edge, hitting the platform 



hard. Wincing,   pushes himself  his feet  stares at , his mouth open. 

“How many times.. .have .. .done that?”   asks between breaths. 

“Twice now,” say. 

He shakes his head. 

When  father hits the net, Caleb helps him across. When   stands on the platform,   leans  
vomits over the side. descend the stairs,  when get  the bottom, hear Marcus hit the net with 
a groan. 

The cavern is empty  the hallways stretch into darkness. 

Jeanine made   sound like there was no one left in the Dauntless compound except the soldiers she 
sent back  guard the computers.  we  find Dauntless soldiers, we  find the computers. look 
over  shoulder. Marcus stands on the platform, white as a sheet but unharmed. 

“So this is the Dauntless compound,” says Marcus. 

“Yes,” say. “And?” 

“And never thought would get  see  ,”   replies, his hand skimming a wall. “No need  be so 
defensive, Beatrice.” 

never noticed how cold his eyes were before. 

“Do  have a plan, Beatrice?”  father says. 

“Yes.” And  ’s true. do, though   not sure when developed  . 

  also not sure   will work.  count on a few things: There aren’t many Dauntless in the 
compound, the Dauntless aren’t known for their subtlety,  I’ll do anything  stop them. 

We walk down the hallway that leads  the Pit, which is striped with light every ten feet. When we 
walk into the first patch of light, hear a gunshot  drop  the ground. Someone must have seen  . 
crawl into the next dark patch. The spark from the gun flashed across the room by the door that leads 
 the Pit. 

“Everyone okay?” ask. 

“Yes,”  father says. 

“Stay here, then.” 

run  the side of the room. The lights protrude from the wall, so directly beneath each one is a slit 
of shadow. am small enough  hide in  , if turn  the side.  creep along the edge of the room 
 surprise whatever guard is shooting at   before   gets the chance  fire a bullet into  brain. 
Maybe. 

One of the things thank Dauntless for is the preparedness that eliminates  fear. 

“Whoever’s there,” a voice shouts, “surrender your weapons  put your hands up!” 

turn  the side  press  back  the stone wall. shuffle quickly sideways, one foot crossing 
over the other, squinting  see through the semidarkness. Another gunshot fires into silence. reach 
the last light  stand for a moment in shadow, letting  eyes adjust. 

 ’t win a fight, but if  move fast enough, won’t have  fight. My footsteps light, walk 
toward the guard who stands by the door. A few yards away, realize that know that dark hair that 
always gleams, even in relative darkness,  that long nose with a narrow bridge. 

’s Peter. 

Cold slips over  skin  around  heart  into the pit of  stomach. 

His face is tense—  isn’t a sleepwalker. He looks around, but his eyes search the air above   
beyond . Judging by his silence,   does not intend  negotiate with  ;   will kill   without 



question. 

lick  lips, sprint the last few steps,  thrust the heel of  hand up. The blow connects with 
his nose,    shouts, bringing both hands up  cover his face. My body jolts with nervous energy 
 as his eyes squint, kick him in the groin. He drops  his knees, his gun clattering  the ground. 
grab    press the barrel  the top of his head. 

“How are  awake?” demand. 

He lifts his head,  click the bullet into its chamber, raising an eyebrow at him. 

“The Dauntless leaders...they evaluated  records  removed  from the simulation,”   says. 

“Because they figured out that  already have murderous tendencies  wouldn’t mind killing a 
few hundred people while conscious,” say. “Makes sense.” 

“  not...murderous!” 

“never knew a Candor who was such a liar.” tap the gun against his skull. “Where are the 
computers that control the simulation, Peter?” 

“You won’t shoot .” 

“People tend  overestimate  character,” say quietly. “They think that because   small, or a 
girl, or a Stiff,  ’t possibly be cruel. But they’re wrong.” 

shift the gun three inches  the left  fire at his arm. 

His screams fill the hallway. Blood spurts from the wound,    screams again, pressing his 
forehead  the ground. shift the gun back  his head, ignoring the pang of guilt in  chest. 

“Now that  realize your mistake,” say, “will give  another chance  tell  what need  
know before shoot  somewhere worse.” 

Another thing  count on: Peter is not selfless. 

He turns his head  focuses a bright eye on . His teeth close over his lower lip,  his breaths 
shake on the   out. And on the   in. And on the   out again. 

“They’re listening,”   spits. “   kill , they will. The only   I’ll tell  is if  get 
 out of here.” 

“What?” 

“Take .. .ahh ...with ,”   says, wincing. 

“You want   take ,” say, “the person who tried  kill .. .with ?” 

“do,”   groans. “  expect  find out what  need  know.” 

 feels like a choice, but   isn’t. Every minute that waste staring at Peter, thinking about how   
haunts  nightmares  the damage   did  , another dozen Abnegation members die at the 
hands of the brain-dead Dauntless army. 

“Fine,” say, almost choking on the word. “Fine.” 

hear footsteps behind . Holding the gun steady, look over  shoulder. My father  the 
others walk toward  . 

My father takes off his long-sleeved shirt. He wears a gray T-shirt beneath  . He crouches next  
Peter  loops the fabric around his arm, tying   tightly. As   presses the fabric  the blood running 
down Peter’s arm,   looks up at   says, “Was   really necessary  shoot him?” 

 answer. 

“Sometimes pain is for the greater good,” says Marcus calmly. 

In  head, see him standing before Tobias with a belt in hand  hear his voice echo. This is for 
your own good. look at him for a few seconds. Does   really believe that?  sounds like something 



the Dauntless would say. 

“Let’s go,” say. “Get up, Peter.” 

“You want him  walk?” Caleb demands. “Are  insane?” 

“Did shoot him in the leg?” say. “No. He walks. Where do we go, Peter?” 

Caleb helps Peter  his feet. 

“The glass building,”   says, wincing. “Eighth floor.” 

He leads the   through the door. 

walk into the roar of the river  the blue glow of the Pit, which is emptier now than have ever 
seen   before. scan the walls, searching for signs of life, but see no movement  no figures 
standing in darkness. keep  gun in hand  start toward the path that leads  the glass ceiling. 
The emptiness makes  shiver.  reminds  of the endless field in  crow nightmares. 

“What makes  think  have the right  shoot someone?”  father says as   follows  up 
the path. We pass the tattoo place. Where is Tori now? And Christina? 

“Now isn’t the time for debates about ethics,” say. 

“Now is the perfect time,”   says, “because  will soon get the opportunity  shoot someone 
again,  if   realize—” 

“Realize what?” say without turning around. “That every second waste means another 
Abnegation dead  another Dauntless made into a murderer? I’ve realized that. Now  ’s your turn.” 

“There is a right    do things.” 

“What makes  so sure that  know what   is?” say. 

“Please stop fighting,” Caleb interrupts, his voice chiding. “We have more important things  do 
right now.” 

keep climbing,  cheeks hot. A few months ago would not have dared  snap at  father. A 
few hours ago might not have done   either. But something changed when they shot  mother. 
When they took Tobias. 

hear  father huff  puff over the sound of rushing water. forgot that   is older than am, 
that his frame  no longer tolerate the weight of his body. 

Before ascend the metal stairs that will carry  above the glass ceiling, wait in darkness  
watch the light cast on the Pit walls by the sun. watch until a shadow shifts over the sunlit wall  
count until the next shadow appears. The guards make their rounds every minute  a half, stand for 
twenty seconds,  then move on. 

“There are men with guns up there. When they see , they will kill , if they ,” tell  
father quietly. search his eyes. “Should let them?” 

He stares at  for a few seconds. 

“Go,”   says, “and God help .” 

climb the stairs carefully, stopping just before  head emerges. wait, watching the shadows 
move,  when one of them stops, step up, point  gun,  shoot. 

The bullet does not hit the guard.  shatters the window behind him. fire again  duck as bullets 
hit the floor around  with a ding. Thank God the glass ceiling is bulletproof, or the glass would 
break  would fall   death. 

One guard down. breathe deeply  put just  hand over the ceiling, looking through the glass 
 see  target. tilt the gun back  fire at the guard running toward . The bullet hits him in the 
arm. Luckily   is his shooting arm, because   drops his gun    skids across the floor. 



My body shaking, launch myself through the hole in the ceiling  snatch the fallen gun before 
   get   . A bullet whizzes past  head, so close  hitting  that   moves  hair. Eyes 
wide, fling  right arm over  shoulder, forcing a searing pain through  body,  fire three 
times behind . By some miracle, one of the bullets hits a guard,   eyes water uncontrollably 
from the pain in  shoulder. just ripped  stitches.   sure of  . 

Another guard stands across from . lie flat on  stomach  point both guns at him,  arms 
resting on the floor. stare into the black pinprick that is his gun barrel. 

Then something surprising happens. He jerks his chin  the side. Telling   go. 

He must be Divergent. 

“All clear!” shout. 

The guard ducks into the fear landscape room,   ’s gone. 

Slowly get   feet, holding  right arm against  chest. have tunnel vision. am running 
along this path  will not be able  stop, will not be able  think of anything, until reach the 
end. 

hand one gun  Caleb  slide the other one under  belt. 

“think   Marcus should stay here with him,” say, jerking  head toward Peter. “He’ll just 
slow   down. Make sure no one comes after  .” 

hope   doesn’t understand what   doing—keeping him here so   stays safe, even though   
would gladly give his life for this.  go up into the building, probably won’t come back down. The 
best  hope for is  destroy the simulation before someone kills . When did decide on this 
suicide mission? Why wasn’t   more difficult? 

“ ’t stay here while  go up there  risk your life,” says Caleb. 

“need  ,” say. 

Peter sinks  his knees. His face glistens with sweat. For a second almost feel bad for him, but 
then remember Edward,  the itch of fabric over  eyes as  attackers blindfolded ,   
sympathy is lost  hatred. Caleb eventually nods. 

approach one of the fallen guards  take his gun, keeping  eyes away from the injury that 
killed him. My head pounds. haven’t eaten; haven’t slept; haven’t sobbed or screamed or even 
paused for a moment. bite  lip  push myself toward the elevators on the right side of the room. 
Level eight. 

Once the elevator doors close, lean the side of  head against the glass  listen  the beeps. 

glance at  father. 

“Thank . For protecting Caleb,”  father says. “Beatrice, I—” 

The elevator reaches the eighth floor  the doors open. Two guards stand ready with guns in hand, 
their faces blank. My eyes widen,  drop   belly on the ground as the shots go off. hear 
bullets strike glass. The guards slump  the ground, one alive  groaning, the other fading fast. My 
father stands above them, his gun still held out from his body. 

stumble   feet. Guards run down the hallway on the left. Judging by the synchronicity of their 
footsteps, they are controlled by the simulation. could run down the right hallway, but if the guards 
came from the left hallway, that’s where the computers are. drop  the ground between the guards 
 father just shot  lie as still as . 

My father jumps out of the elevator  sprints down the right hallway, drawing the Dauntless 
guards after him. clap  hand over  mouth  keep from screaming at him. That hallway will 



end. 

try  bury  head so  see  , but  ’t. peer over the fallen guard’s back. My father 
fires over his shoulder at the guards pursuing him, but   is not fast enough. One of them fires at his 
stomach,    groans so loud  almost feel   in  chest. 

He clutches his gut, his shoulders hitting the wall,  fires again. And again. The guards are under 
the simulation; they keep moving even when the bullets hit them, keep moving until their hearts stop, 
but they  reach  father. Blood spills over his hand  the color drains from his face. Another 
shot  the last guard is down. 

“Dad,” say. mean for    be a shout, but   is just a wheeze. 

He slumps  the ground. Our eyes meet like the yards between   are nothing. 

His mouth opens like  ’s about  say something, but then his chin drops  his chest  his body 
relaxes. 

My eyes burn  am too weak  rise; the scent of sweat  blood makes  feel sick. want  
rest  head on the ground  let that be the end of  . want  sleep now  never wake. 

But what said   father before was right—for every second that waste, another Abnegation 
member dies. There is only one thing left for  in the world now,    is  destroy the simulation. 

push myself up  run down the hallway, turning right at the end. There is only one door ahead. 
open  . 

The opposite wall is made up entirely of screens, each a foot tall  a foot wide. There are dozens 
of them, each one showing a different part of the city. The fence. The Hub. The streets in the 
Abnegation sector, now crawling with Dauntless soldiers. The ground level of the building below  , 
where Caleb, Marcus,  Peter wait for   return.  is a wall of everything have ever seen, 
everything have ever known. 

One of the screens has a line of code on   instead of an image.  breezes past faster than  read. 
 is the simulation, the code already compiled, a complicated list of commands that anticipate  
address a thousand different outcomes. 

In front of the screen is a chair  a desk. Sitting in the chair is a Dauntless soldier. 

“Tobias,” say. 

Tobias’s head turns,  his dark eyes shift  . His eyebrows draw in. He stands. He looks 
confused. He raises his gun. 

“Drop your weapon,”   says. 

“Tobias,” say, “you’re in a simulation.” 

“Drop your weapon,”   repeats. “Or I’ll fire.” 

Jeanine said   didn’t know . Jeanine also said that the simulation made Tobias’s friends into 
enemies. He will shoot  if   has . 

set  gun down at  feet. 

“Drop your weapon!” shouts Tobias. 

“did,” say. A little voice in  head sings that    ’t hear ,    ’t see ,   doesn’t 
know . Tongues of flame press behind  eyes.  ’t just stand here  let him shoot . 

run at him, grabbing his wrist. feel his muscles shift as   pinches the trigger  duck  head 
just in time. The bullet hits the wall behind . Gasping, kick him in the ribs  twist his wrist  
the side as hard as . He drops the gun. 

 ’t beat Tobias in a fight. know that already. But have  destroy the computer. dive for the 
gun, but before  touch  ,   grabs   wrenches   the side. 

stare into his dark, conflicted eyes for an instant before   punches  in the jaw. My head jerks 
 the side  cringe away from him, flinging  hands up  protect  face.  ’t fall;  ’t 
fall or  ’ll kick ,  that will be worse, that will be much worse. kick the gun back with  heel 
so    ’t grab   , ignoring the throbbing in  jaw, kick him in the stomach. 

He catches  foot  pulls  down so fall on  shoulder. The pain makes  vision go black 
at the edges. stare up at him. He pulls his foot back like  ’s about  kick ,  roll onto  
knees, stretching  arm out for the gun.  know what I’ll do with  .  ’t shoot him,  ’t 
shoot him,  ’t. He is in there somewhere. 

He grabs  by  hair  yanks   the side. reach back  grab his wrist, but  ’s too 
strong   forehead smacks into the wall. 

He is in there somewhere. 

“Tobias,” say. 

Did his grip falter? twist  kick back,  heel hitting him in the leg. When  hair slips 
through his fingers, dive at the gun   fingertips close around the cool metal. flip over onto 
 back  point the gun at him. 

“Tobias,” say. “know you’re in there somewhere.” 

But if   was,   probably wouldn’t start toward  like  ’s about  kill  for certain this time. 

My head throbs. stand. 

“Tobias, please.” am begging. am pathetic. Tears make  face hot. “Please. See .” He walks 
toward , his movements dangerous, fast, powerful. The gun shakes in  hands. “Please see , 
Tobias, please!” 

Even when   scowls, his eyes look thoughtful,  remember how his mouth curled when   
smiled. 

 ’t kill him. am not sure if love him; not sure if that’s why. But am sure of what   would 


do if our positions were reversed. am sure that nothing is worth killing him for. 

have done this before—in  fear landscape, with the gun in  hand, a voice shouting at   
fire at the people love. volunteered  die instead, that time, but  ’t imagine how that would 
help  now. But just know, know what the right thing  do is. 

My father says—used  say—that there is power in self-sacrifice. 

turn the gun in  hands  press   into Tobias’s palm. 

He pushes the barrel into  forehead. My tears have stopped  the air feels cold as   touches  
cheeks. reach out  rest  hand on his chest so  feel his heartbeat. At least his heartbeat is 
still him. 

The bullet clicks into the chamber. Maybe   will be as easy  let him shoot  as   was in the fear 
landscape, as   is in  dreams. Maybe   will just be a bang,  the lights will lift,  will find 
myself in another world. stand still  wait. 

Can be forgiven for all I’ve done  get here? 

 know.  know. 

Please. 

The shot doesn’t come. He stares at  with the same ferocity but doesn’t move. Why doesn’t   
shoot ? His heart pounds against  palm,   own heart lifts. He is Divergent. He  fight 
this simulation. Any simulation. 

“Tobias,” say. “’s .” 

step forward  wrap  arms around him. His body is stiff. His heart beats faster.  feel   
against  cheek. A thud against  cheek. A thud as the gun hits the floor. He grabs  shoulders— 
too hard, his fingers digging into  skin where the bullet was. cry out as   pulls  back. Maybe 
  means  kill  in some crueler  . 

“Tris,”   says,   ’s him again. His mouth collides with mine. 

His arm wraps around     lifts  up, holding  against him, his hands clutching at  
back. His face  the back of his neck are slick with sweat, his body is shaking,   shoulder 
blazes with pain, but  care,  care,  care. 

He sets  down  stares at , his fingers brushing over  forehead,  eyebrows,  cheeks, 
 lips. 

Something like a sob  a sigh  a moan escapes him,    kisses  again. His eyes are 
bright with tears. never thought would see Tobias cry.  makes  hurt. 

pull myself  his chest  cry into his shirt. All the throbbing in  head comes back,  the 
ache in  shoulder,  feel like  body weight doubles. lean against him,    supports . 

“How did  do  ?” say. 

“ know,”   says. “just heard your voice.” 

After a few seconds, remember why   here. pull back  wipe  cheeks with the heels of  
hands  turn toward the screens again. see one that overlooks the drinking fountain. Tobias was so 
paranoid when was railing against Dauntless there. He kept looking at the wall above the fountain. 
Now know why. 

Tobias  stand there for a while,  think know what  ’s thinking, because   thinking   
too: How  something so small control so many people? 

“Was running the simulation?”   says. 

“ know if  were running   so much as monitoring  ,” say. “’s already complete. have 
no idea how, but Jeanine made   so   could work on its own.” 

He shakes his head. “’s...incredible. Terrible, evil...but incredible.” 

see movement on one of the screens  see  brother, Marcus,  Peter standing on the first 
floor of the building. Surrounding them are Dauntless soldiers, all in black, all carrying weapons. 

“Tobias,” say tersely. “Now!” 

He runs  the computer screen  taps   a few times with his finger.  ’t look at what  ’s 
doing. All  see is  brother. He holds the gun gave him straight out from his body, like  ’s 
ready  use  . bite  lip. Don’t shoot. Tobias presses the screen a few more times, typing in letters 
that make no sense  . Don’t shoot. 

see a flash of light—a spark, from one of the guns—and gasp. My brother  Marcus  Peter 
crouch on the ground with their arms over their heads. After a moment they all stir, so know they’re 
still alive,  the Dauntless soldiers advance. A cluster of black around  brother. 


“Tobias,” say. 

He presses the screen again,  everyone on the first floor goes still. 

Their arms drop  their sides. 

And then the Dauntless move. Their heads turn from side  side,  they drop their guns,  their 
mouths move like they’re shouting,  they shove each other,  some of them sink  their knees, 
holding their heads  rocking back  forth, back  forth. 

All the tension in  chest unravels,  sit down, heaving a sigh. 

Tobias crouches next  the computer  pulls the side of the case off. 

“have  get the data,”   says, “or they’ll just start the simulation again.” 

watch the frenzy on the screen.  is the same frenzy that must be happening on the streets. scan 
the screens, one by one, looking for one that shows the Abnegation sector of the city. There is only one 
— ’s at the far end of the room, on the bottom. The Dauntless on that screen are firing at one another, 
shoving one another, screaming—chaos. Black-clothed men  women drop  the ground. People 
sprint in every direction. 

“Got  ,” says Tobias, holding up the computer’s hard drive.  is a piece of metal about the size of 
his palm. He offers    ,  shove   in  back pocket. 

“We have  leave,” say, getting   feet. point at the screen on the right. 

“Yes, we do.” He wraps his arm across  shoulders. “Come on.” 

We walk together down the hallway  around the corner. The elevator reminds  of  father. 
 ’t stop myself from looking for his body. 

 is on the floor next  the elevator, surrounded by the bodies of several guards. A strangled 
scream escapes . turn away. Bile leaps into  throat  throw up against the wall. 

For a second feel like everything inside  is breaking,  crouch by a body, breathing through 
 mouth so  smell the blood. clamp  hand over  mouth  contain a sob. Five more 
seconds. Five seconds of weakness  then get up. One, two. Three, four. 

Five. 

am not really aware of  surroundings. There is an elevator  a glass room  a rush of cold air. 
There is a shouting crowd of Dauntless soldiers dressed in black. search for Caleb’s face, but   is 
nowhere, nowhere until we leave the glass building  step out into sunlight. 

Caleb runs   when walk through the doors,  fall against him. He holds  tightly. 

“Dad?”   says. 

just shake  head. 

“Well,”   says, almost choking on the word, “  would have wanted   that  .” 

Over Caleb’s shoulder, see Tobias stop in the middle of a footstep. His entire body goes rigid as 
his eyes focus on Marcus. In the rush  destroy the simulation, forgot  warn him. 

Marcus walks up  Tobias  wraps his arms around his son. Tobias stays frozen, his arms at his 
sides  his face blank. watch his Adam’s apple bob up  down  his eyes lift  the ceiling. 

“Son,” sighs Marcus. 

Tobias winces. 

“Hey,” say, pulling away from Caleb. remember the belt stinging on  wrist in Tobias’s fear 
landscape  slip into the space between them, pushing Marcus back. “Hey. Get away from him.” 

feel Tobias’s breaths against  neck; they come in sharp bursts. 



“Stay away,” hiss. 

“Beatrice, what are  doing?” asks Caleb. 

“Tris,” Tobias says. 

Marcus gives  a scandalized look that seems false  me—his eyes are too wide  his mouth is 
too open.  could find a    smack that look off his face, would. 

“Not all those Erudite articles were full of lies,” say, narrowing  eyes at Marcus. 

“What are  talking about?” Marcus says quietly. “ know what you’ve been told, Beatrice, 
but—” 

“The only reason haven’t shot  yet is because  ’s the one who should get  do  ,” say. “Stay 
away from him or I’ll decide no longer care.” 

Tobias’s hands slip around  arms  squeeze. Marcus’s eyes stay on mine for a few seconds, 
  ’t help but see them as black pits, like they were in Tobias’s fear landscape. Then   looks 
away. 

“We have  go,” Tobias says unsteadily. “The train should be here any second.” 

We walk over unyielding ground toward the train tracks. Tobias’s jaw is clenched    stares 
straight ahead. feel a twinge of regret. Maybe should have let him deal with his father on his own. 

“Sorry,” mutter. 

“You have nothing  be sorry for,”   replies, taking  hand. His fingers are still shaking. 

“ we take the train in the opposite direction, out of the city instead of in, we  get  Amity 
headquarters,” say. “That’s where the others went.” 

“What about Candor?”  brother asks. “What do  think they’ll do?” 

 know how Candor will respond  the attack. They wouldn’t side with the Erudite—they 
would never do something that underhanded. But they may not fight the Erudite either. 

We stand next  the tracks for a few minutes before the train comes. Eventually Tobias picks  
up, because am dead on  feet,  lean  head into his shoulder, taking deep breaths of his 
skin. Since   saved  from the attack, have associated his smell with safety, so as long as focus 
on  , feel safe now. 

The truth is, will not feel safe as long as Peter  Marcus are with  . try not  look at them, 
but feel their presence like would feel a blanket over  face. The cruelty of fate is that must 
travel with the people hate when the people love are dead behind . 

Dead, or waking as murderers. Where are Christina  Tori now? Wandering the streets, plagued 
with guilt for what they’ve done? Or turning guns on the people who forced them  do  ? Or are they 
already dead too? wish knew. 

At the same time, hope never find out.  she is still alive, Christina will find Will’s body. And if 
she sees  again, her Candor-trained eyes will see that am the one who killed him, know  . 
know    the guilt strangles   crushes , so have  forget  . make myself forget  . 

The train comes,  Tobias sets  down so  jump on. jog a few steps next  the car  
then throw  body  the side, landing on  left arm. wiggle  body inside  sit against the 
wall. Caleb sits across from ,  Tobias sits next  , forming a barrier between  body  
Marcus  Peter. My enemies. His enemies. 

The train turns,  see the city behind  .  will get smaller  smaller until we see where the 
tracks end, the forests  fields last saw when was too young  appreciate them. The kindness of 
Amity will comfort   for a while, though we  ’t stay there forever. Soon the Erudite  the 



corrupt Dauntless leaders will look for  ,  we will have  move on. 

Tobias pulls  against him. We bend our knees  our heads so that we are enclosed together in a 
room of our own making, unable  see those who trouble  , our breath mixing on the   in  on 
the   out. 

“My parents,” say. “They died today.” 

Even though said  ,  even though know  ’s true,   doesn’t feel real. 

“They died for ,” say. That feels important. 

“They loved ,”   replies. “To them there was no better    show .” 

nod,   eyes follow the line of his jaw. 

“You nearly died today,”   says. “almost shot . Why didn’t  shoot , Tris?” 

“couldn’t do that,” say. “ would have been like shooting myself.” 

He looks pained  leans closer  , so his lips brush mine when   speaks. 

“have something  tell ,”   says. 

run  fingers along the tendons in his hand  look back at him. 

“might be in love with .” He smiles a little. “  waiting until   sure  tell , though.” 

“That’s sensible of ,” say, smiling too. “We should find some paper so   make a list or a 
chart or something.” 

feel his laughter against  side, his nose sliding along  jaw, his lips pressing behind  ear. 

“Maybe   already sure,”   says, “and just  want  frighten .” 

laugh a little. “Then  should know better.” 

“Fine,”   says. “Then love .” 

kiss him as the train slides into unlit, uncertain land. kiss him for as long as want, for longer 
than should, given that  brother sits three feet away from . 

reach into  pocket  take out the hard drive that contains the simulation data. turn   in  
hands, letting   catch the fading light  reflect  . Marcus’s eyes cling greedily  the movement. 
Not safe, think. Not quite. 

clutch the hard drive   chest, lean  head on Tobias’s shoulder,  try  sleep. 

Abnegation  Dauntless are both broken, their members scattered. We are like the factionless now. 
do not know what life will be like, separated from a faction—  feels disengaged, like a leaf divided 
from the tree that gives   sustenance. We are creatures of loss; we have left everything behind. have 
no home, no path,  no certainty. am no longer Tris, the selfless, or Tris, the brave. 

suppose that now, must become more than either. 



